                               http://www.econometricsociety.org/




                 Econometrica, Vol. 83, No. 6 (November, 2015), 2127–2189

                           THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY:
                         EVIDENCE FROM THE BERLIN WALL

                                 GABRIEL M. AHLFELDT
             London School of Economics, London, WC2A 2AE, U.K. and CEPR

                                   STEPHEN J. REDDING
          WWS, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, U.S.A., NBER, and CEPR

                                   DANIEL M. STURM
             London School of Economics, London, WC2A 2AE, U.K. and CEPR

                                     NIKOLAUS WOLF
                    Humboldt University, 10178 Berlin, Germany and CEPR




The copyright to this Article is held by the Econometric Society. It may be downloaded,
printed and reproduced only for educational or research purposes, including use in course
packs. No downloading or copying may be done for any commercial purpose without the
explicit permission of the Econometric Society. For such commercial purposes contact
the Office of the Econometric Society (contact information may be found at the website
http://www.econometricsociety.org or in the back cover of Econometrica). This statement must
be included on all copies of this Article that are made available electronically or in any other
format.
                  Econometrica, Vol. 83, No. 6 (November, 2015), 2127–2189

                      THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE BERLIN WALL

                BY GABRIEL M. AHLFELDT, STEPHEN J. REDDING,
                   DANIEL M. STURM, AND NIKOLAUS WOLF1
       This paper develops a quantitative model of internal city structure that features
    agglomeration and dispersion forces and an arbitrary number of heterogeneous city
    blocks. The model remains tractable and amenable to empirical analysis because of
    stochastic shocks to commuting decisions, which yield a gravity equation for commut-
    ing flows. To structurally estimate agglomeration and dispersion forces, we use data on
    thousands of city blocks in Berlin for 1936, 1986, and 2006 and exogenous variation
    from the city’s division and reunification. We estimate substantial and highly localized
    production and residential externalities. We show that the model with the estimated
    agglomeration parameters can account both qualitatively and quantitatively for the
    observed changes in city structure. We show how our quantitative framework can be
    used to undertake counterfactuals for changes in the organization of economic activity
    within cities in response, for example, to changes in the transport network.

       KEYWORDS: Agglomeration, cities, commuting, density, gravity.


                                    1. INTRODUCTION
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IS HIGHLY UNEVENLY DISTRIBUTED across space, as re-
flected in the existence of cities and the concentration of economic functions in
specific locations within cities, such as Manhattan in New York and the Square
Mile in London. Understanding the strength of the agglomeration and disper-
sion forces that underlie these concentrations of economic activity is central
to a range of economic and policy questions. These forces shape the size and
internal structure of cities, with implications for the incomes of immobile fac-
tors, congestion costs, and city productivity. They also determine the impact
of public policy interventions, such as transport infrastructure investments and
urban development and taxation policies.

   1
     We are grateful to the European Research Council (Grant 263733), German Science Foun-
dation (Grants STU 477/1-1 and WO 1429/1-1), the Centre for Economic Performance, and
Princeton University for financial support. The accompanying online Supplemental Material con-
tains detailed derivations and supplementary material for the paper. A separate Technical Data
Appendix, located together with the replication data and code, collects together additional em-
pirical results and robustness tests. Thilo Albers, Horst Bräunlich, Daniela Glocker, Kristoffer
Möller, David Nagy, Utz Pape, Ferdinand Rauch, Claudia Steinwender, Sevrin Waights, and
Nicolai Wendland provided excellent research assistance. We would like to thank the editor, four
anonymous referees, conference and seminar participants at AEA, Arizona, Barcelona, Berlin,
Berkeley, Brussels, CEPR, Chicago, Clemson, Columbia, EEA, Harvard, Mannheim, Marseille,
MIT, Munich, NARSC, Luzern, Nottingham, NYU, Oxford, Paris, Princeton, Rutgers, Shanghai,
Stanford, Tübingen, UCLA, Virginia, and the World Bank for helpful comments. We are also
grateful to Dave Donaldson, Cecilia Fieler, Gene Grossman, Bo Honore, Ulrich Müller, Sam
Kortum, Eduardo Morales, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg for their comments and suggestions.
The usual disclaimer applies.

© 2015 The Econometric Society                                        DOI: 10.3982/ECTA10876
2128                    AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

   Although there is a long literature on economic geography and urban eco-
nomics dating back to at least Marshall (1920), a central challenge remains
distinguishing agglomeration and dispersion forces from variation in locational
fundamentals. While high land prices and levels of economic activity in a group
of neighboring locations are consistent with strong agglomeration forces, they
are also consistent with shared amenities that make these locations attractive
places to live (e.g., leafy streets and scenic views) or common natural advan-
tages that make these locations attractive for production (e.g., access to natural
water). This challenge has both theoretical and empirical dimensions. From a
theoretical perspective, to develop tractable models of cities, the existing liter-
ature typically makes simplifying assumptions such as monocentricity or sym-
metry, which abstracts from variation in locational fundamentals and limits
the usefulness of these models for empirical work. From an empirical perspec-
tive, the challenge is to find exogenous sources of variation in the surrounding
concentration of economic activity to help disentangle agglomeration and dis-
persion forces from variation in locational fundamentals.
   In this paper, we develop a quantitative theoretical model of internal city
structure. This model incorporates agglomeration and dispersion forces and an
arbitrary number of heterogeneous locations within the city, while remaining
tractable and amenable to empirical analysis. Locations differ in terms of pro-
ductivity, amenities, the density of development (which determines the ratio of
floor space to ground area), and access to transport infrastructure. Productivity
depends on production externalities, which are determined by the surround-
ing density of workers, and production fundamentals, such as topography and
proximity to natural supplies of water. Amenities depend on residential ex-
ternalities, which are determined by the surrounding density of residents, and
residential fundamentals, such as access to forests and lakes. Congestion forces
take the form of an inelastic supply of land and commuting costs that are in-
creasing in travel time, where travel time in turn depends on the transport
network.2
   We combine this quantitative theoretical model with the natural experiment
of Berlin’s division in the aftermath of the Second World War and its reuni-
fication following the fall of the Iron Curtain. The division of Berlin severed
all local economic interactions between East and West Berlin, which corre-
sponds in the model to prohibitive trade and commuting costs and no produc-
tion and residential externalities between these two parts of the city. We make
use of a remarkable and newly collected data set for Berlin, which includes
data on land prices, employment by place of work (which we term “workplace
employment”), and employment by place of residence (which we term “resi-
dence employment”) covering the pre-war, division, and reunification periods.

   2
     We use “production fundamental” to refer to a characteristic of a location that directly affects
productivity (e.g., natural water) independently of the surrounding economic activity. We use
“residential fundamental” to refer to a characteristic of a location that directly affects the utility
of residents (e.g., forests) independently of the surrounding economic activity.
                         THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                            2129

We first present reduced-form evidence in support of the model’s qualitative
predictions without imposing the full structure of the model. We show that di-
vision leads to a reorientation of the gradient in land prices and employment
in West Berlin away from the main pre-war concentration of economic activity
in East Berlin, while reunification leads to a reemergence of this gradient. In
contrast, there is little effect of division or reunification on land prices or em-
ployment along other more economically remote sections of the Berlin Wall.
We show that these results are not driven by pre-trends prior to division or
reunification. We also show that these results are robust to controlling for a
host of observable block characteristics, including controls for access to the
transport network, schools, parks and other green areas, lakes and other water
areas, Second World War destruction, land use, urban regeneration policies,
and government buildings post reunification.
   We next examine whether the model can account quantitatively for the ob-
served impact of division and reunification. We show that the model implies a
gravity equation for commuting flows, which can be used to estimate its com-
muting parameters. Using these estimates, we determine overall measures of
productivity, amenities, and the density of development for each block, with-
out making any assumptions about the relative importance or functional form
of externalities and fundamentals as components of overall productivity and
amenities. In the special case of the model in which overall productivity and
amenities are exogenous, the model has a unique equilibrium, and hence can
be used to undertake counterfactuals that have determinate predictions for
the impact of division and reunification. We use these counterfactuals to show
that the model with exogenous productivity and amenities is unable to account
quantitatively for the observed impact of division and reunification on the pat-
tern of economic activity within West Berlin.
   We next use the exogenous variation from Berlin’s division and reunifica-
tion to structurally estimate both the agglomeration and commuting parame-
ters. This allows us to decompose overall productivity and amenities for each
block into production and residential externalities (which capture agglomer-
ation forces) and production and residential fundamentals (which are struc-
tural residuals). Our identifying assumption is that changes in these structural
residuals are uncorrelated with the exogenous change in the surrounding con-
centration of economic activity induced by Berlin’s division and reunification.
This identifying assumption requires that the systematic change in the pattern
of economic activity in West Berlin following division and reunification is ex-
plained by the mechanisms of the model (the changes in commuting access and
production and residential externalities) rather than by systematic changes in
the pattern of structural residuals (production and residential fundamentals).
   Our structural estimates of the model’s parameters imply substantial and
highly localized production externalities. Our central estimate of the elasticity
of productivity with respect to the density of workplace employment is 0.07,
which is towards the high end of the range of existing estimates using variation
2130               AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

between cities. In contrast to these existing estimates using data across cities,
our analysis makes use of variation within cities. Our structural estimate of
the elasticity of productivity with respect to density holds constant the distri-
bution of travel times within the city. In reality, a doubling in total city pop-
ulation is typically achieved by a combination of an increase in the density of
economic activity and an expansion in geographical land area, which increases
travel times within the city. Since we find that production externalities decay
rapidly with travel times, this attenuates production externalities, which has to
be taken into account when comparing estimates within and across cities. We
also find substantial and highly localized residential externalities. Our central
estimate of the elasticity of amenities with respect to the density of residents
is 0.15, which is consistent with the view that consumption externalities are an
important agglomeration force in addition to production externalities.
   In the presence of agglomeration forces, there is the potential for multiple
equilibria in the model. An advantage of our estimation approach is that it ad-
dresses this potential existence of multiple equilibria. We distinguish between
calibrating the model to the observed data given known parameter values and
estimating the model for unknown parameters. First, given known values for
the model’s parameters, we show that there is a unique mapping from these
parameters and the observed data to the structural residuals (production and
residential fundamentals). This mapping is unique regardless of whether the
model has a single equilibrium or multiple equilibria, because the parameters,
observed data, and equilibrium conditions of the model (including profit max-
imization, zero profits, utility maximization, and population mobility) contain
enough information to solve for unique values of these structural residuals.
Second, we estimate the model’s parameters using the generalized method of
moments (GMM) and moment conditions in terms of these structural residu-
als. Since these structural residuals are closed-form functions of the observed
data and parameters, this estimation holds constant the observed endogenous
variables of the model at their values in the data. In principle, these moment
conditions need not uniquely identify the model parameters, because the ob-
jective function defined by them may not be globally concave. For example,
the objective function could be flat in the parameter space or there could be
multiple local minima corresponding to different combinations of parameters
and unobserved fundamentals that explain the data. In practice, we show that
the objective function is well behaved in the parameter space, and that these
moment conditions determine a unique value for the parameter vector.
   We also undertake counterfactuals in the estimated model with agglomer-
ation forces. To address the potential for multiple equilibria in this case, we
assume the equilibrium selection rule of searching for the counterfactual equi-
librium closest to the observed equilibrium prior to the counterfactual. We
show that the model with the estimated agglomeration parameters can gener-
ate counterfactual predictions for the treatment effects of division and reunifi-
cation that are close to the observed treatment effects. We also show how our
                             THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                   2131

quantitative framework can be used to undertake counterfactuals for changes
in the organization of economic activity within cities in response, for example,
to changes in the transport network.
   Finally, we undertake a variety of over-identification checks and robustness
tests. First, using our estimates of the model’s commuting parameters based
on bilateral commuting flows for 2008, we show that the model is successful
in capturing the cumulative distribution of commuters across travel times in
the pre-war, division, and reunification periods. Second, we find that the ratio
of floor space to land area in the model is strongly related to separate data
on this variable not used in the estimation of the model. Finally, we also find
that production and residential fundamentals in the model are correlated in
the expected way with observable proxies for these fundamentals.
   Our paper builds on the large theoretical literature on urban economics.
Much of this literature has analyzed the monocentric city model, in which firms
are assumed to locate in a Central Business District (CBD) and workers decide
how close to live to this CBD.3 Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg (2002) were the first
to develop a model of a two-dimensional city, in which equilibrium patterns of
economic activity can be nonmonocentric. In their model, space is continuous
and the city is assumed to be symmetric, so that distance from the center is
a summary statistic for the organization of economic activity within the city.4
Empirically, cities are, however, not perfectly symmetric because of variation
in locational fundamentals, and most data on cities are reported for discrete
spatial units such as blocks or census tracts.
   Our contribution is to develop a quantitative theoretical model of internal
city structure that allows for a large number of discrete locations within the city
that can differ arbitrarily in terms of their natural advantages for production,
residential amenities, land supply, and transport infrastructure. The analysis
remains tractable despite the large number of asymmetric locations because
we incorporate a stochastic formulation of workers’ commuting decisions that
follows Eaton and Kortum (2002) and McFadden (1974). This stochastic for-
mulation yields a system of equations that can be solved for unique equilibrium
wages given observed workplace and residence employment in each location.
It also provides microeconomic foundations for a gravity equation for com-
muting flows that has been found to be empirically successful.5
   Our paper is also related to the broader literature on the nature and sources
of agglomeration economies, as reviewed in Duranton and Puga (2004) and
Rosenthal and Strange (2004). A large empirical literature has regressed

   3
     The classic urban models of Alonso (1964), Mills (1967), and Muth (1969) assume monocen-
tricity. While Fujita and Ogawa (1982) and Fujita and Krugman (1995) allowed for nonmonocen-
tricity, they modeled one-dimensional cities on the real line.
   4
     For an empirical analysis of the symmetric-city model of Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg (2002),
see Brinkman (2013).
   5
     See Grogger and Hanson (2011) and Kennan and Walker (2011) for analyses of worker mi-
gration decisions using stochastic formulations of utility following McFadden (1974).
2132                  AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

wages, land prices, productivity, or employment growth on population den-
sity.6 We contribute to the small strand of research within this literature that
has sought sources of exogenous variation in the surrounding concentration of
economic activity. For example, Rosenthal and Strange (2008) and Combes,
Duranton, Gobillon, and Roux (2010) used geology as an instrument for pop-
ulation density, exploiting the idea that tall buildings are easier to construct
where solid bedrock is accessible. Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010)
provided evidence on agglomeration spillovers by comparing changes in total
factor productivity (TFP) among incumbent plants in “winning” counties that
attracted a large manufacturing plant and “losing” counties that were the new
plant’s runner-up choice.7
   Other related research has examined the effect of historical natural exper-
iments on the location of economic activity, including Hanson (1996, 1997)
using Mexican trade liberalization; Davis and Weinstein (2002, 2008) using the
wartime bombing of Japan; Bleakley and Lin (2012) using historical portage
sites; and Kline and Moretti (2014) using the Tennessee Valley Authority
(TVA). Using the division and reunification of Germany, Redding and Sturm
(2008) examined the effect of changes in market access on the growth of West
German cities, and Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2011) examined the reloca-
tion of Germany’s air hub from Berlin to Frankfurt as a shift between multiple
steady-states. In contrast to all of the above studies, which exploit variation
across regions or cities, our focus is on the determinants of economic activ-
ity within cities.8 Our main contribution is to develop a tractable quantitative
model of internal city structure that incorporates agglomeration forces and a
rich geography of heterogeneous location characteristics and structurally esti-
mate the model using the exogenous variation of Berlin’s division and reunifi-
cation.
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses
the historical background. Section 3 outlines the model. Section 4 introduces
our data. Section 5 presents reduced-form empirical results on the impact of
Berlin’s division and reunification. Section 6 uses the model’s gravity equation
predictions to determine the commuting parameters and solve for overall val-
ues of productivity, amenities, and the density of development. Section 7 struc-
turally estimates both the model’s agglomeration and commuting parameters;

  6
     See, for example, Ciccone and Hall (1996), Dekle and Eaton (1999), Glaeser and Mare
(2001), Henderson, Kuncoro, and Turner (1995), Moretti (2004), Rauch (1993), Roback (1982),
and Sveikauskas (1975), as surveyed in Moretti (2011).
   7
     Another related empirical literature has examined the relationship between economic activ-
ity and transport infrastructure, including Donaldson (2015), Baum-Snow (2007), Duranton and
Turner (2012), Faber (2015), and Michaels (2008).
   8
     Other research using within-city data includes Arzaghi and Henderson (2008) on the location
of advertising agencies in Manhattan and Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and Owens (2010) on urban
revitalization policies in Richmond, Virginia.
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                      2133

uses these estimated parameters to decompose overall productivity and ameni-
ties into the contributions of externalities and fundamentals; and undertakes
counterfactuals. Section 8 concludes.


                             2. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
   The city of Berlin in its current boundaries was created in 1920 when
the historical city and its surrounding agglomeration were incorporated un-
der the Greater Berlin law (“Gross Berlin Gesetz”). The city comprises 892
square kilometers of land compared, for example, to 606 square kilometers for
Chicago. The city was originally divided into 20 districts (“Bezirke”), which had
minimal administrative autonomy.9 The political process that ultimately led to
the construction of the Berlin Wall had its origins in war-time planning dur-
ing the Second World War. A protocol signed in London in September 1944
delineated zones of occupation in Germany for the American, British, and So-
viet armies after the eventual defeat of Germany. This protocol also stipulated
that Berlin, although around 200 kilometers within the Soviet occupation zone,
should be jointly occupied. For this purpose, Berlin was itself divided into sep-
arate occupation sectors.
   The key principles underlying the drawing of the boundaries of the occupa-
tion sectors in Berlin were that the sectors should be geographically orientated
to correspond with the occupation zones (with the Soviets in the East and the
Western Allies in the West); the boundaries between them should respect the
boundaries of the existing administrative districts of Berlin; and the Ameri-
can, British, and Soviet sectors should be approximately equal in population
(prior to the creation of the French sector from part of the British sector).
The final agreement in July 1945 allocated six districts to the American sector
(31 percent of the 1939 population and 24 percent of the area), four districts
to the British sector (21 percent of the 1939 population and 19 percent of the
area), two districts to the French sector (12 percent of the 1939 population and
12 percent of the area), and eight districts to the Soviet sector (37 percent of
the 1939 population and 46 percent of the area).10
   The London protocol specifying the occupation sectors also created institu-
tions for a joint administration of Berlin (and Germany more generally). The

  9
    The boundaries of these 20 districts were slightly revised in April 1938. During division,
the East Berlin authorities created three new districts (Hellersdorf, Marzahn, and Hohenschön-
hausen), which were created from parts of Weissensee and Lichtenberg. Except for a few other
minor changes, as discussed in Elkins and Hofmeister (1988), the district boundaries remained
unchanged during the post-war period until an administrative reform in 2001, which reduced the
number of districts to twelve.
   10
      The occupation sectors were based on the April 1938 revision of the boundaries of the 20
pre-war districts. For further discussion of the diplomatic history of the division of Berlin, see
Franklin (1963) and Sharp (1975).
2134                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

intention was for Berlin to be governed as a single economic and administra-
tive unit by a joint council (“Kommandatura”) with Soviet, American, British,
and French representatives. However, with the onset of the Cold War, the rela-
tionship between the Western allies and the Soviet Union began to deteriorate.
In June 1948, the Western allies unilaterally introduced a new currency in their
occupation zones and the Western sectors of Berlin. In retaliation, the Soviet
Union decided to block all road and rail access to the Western sectors of Berlin
for nearly eleven months, and West Berlin was supplied through the Berlin air-
lift during this time. The foundation of East and West Germany as separate
states in 1949 and the creation of separate city governments in East and West
Berlin further cemented the division of Germany and Berlin into Eastern and
Western parts.
   Following the adoption of Soviet-style policies of command and control in
East Germany, the main border between East and West Germany was closed
in 1952. While the implementation of these policies in East Berlin limited eco-
nomic interactions with the Western sectors, the boundary between East and
West Berlin remained formally open.11 This open border resulted in some com-
muting of workers between East and West Berlin.12 It also became a conduit
for refugees fleeing to West Germany. To stem this flow of refugees, the East
German authorities constructed the Berlin Wall in 1961, which ended all local
economic interactions between East and West Berlin.
   Figure 1 shows the pre-war land price gradient in Berlin and the path of the
Berlin Wall. As apparent from the figure, the Berlin Wall consisted of an in-
ner boundary between West and East Berlin and an outer boundary between
West Berlin and East Germany. The inner boundary ran along the Western
edge of the district Mitte, which contained Berlin’s main administrative, cul-
tural, and educational institutions and by far the largest pre-war concentration
of employment. The Berlin Wall cut through the pre-war transport network, in-
tersecting underground railway (“U-Bahn”) and suburban railway (“S-Bahn”)
lines, which were closed off at the boundaries with East Berlin or East Ger-
many.13 During the period of division, West Germany introduced a number of
policies to support economic activity in West Berlin, such as subsidies to trans-
portation between West Berlin and West Germany, reduced tax rates, and an

   11
      While East Berlin remained the main concentration of economic activity in East Germany
after division, only around 2 percent of West Berlin’s exports from 1957 to 1967 were to East
Germany (including East Berlin) and other Eastern block countries (see Lambrecht and Tischner
(1969)).
   12
      Approximately 122,000 people commuted from West to East Berlin in the fall of 1949, but
this number quickly declined after waves of mass redundancies of Western workers in East Berlin
and stood at about 13,000 workers in 1961 just before the construction of the Berlin Wall. Com-
muting flows in the opposite direction are estimated to be 76,000 in 1949 and decline to 31,000 in
1953 before slowly climbing to 63,000 in 1961 (Roggenbuch (2008)).
   13
      In a few cases, trains briefly passed through East Berlin territory en route from one part
of West Berlin to another. These cases gave rise to ghost stations (“Geisterbahnhöfe”) in East
Berlin, where trains passed through stations patrolled by East German guards without stopping.
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                     2135




                           FIGURE 1.—Land prices in Berlin in 1936.


exemption from military service for residents of West Berlin. Whereas our em-
pirical analysis exploits relative variation across locations within West Berlin,
these policies applied equally to all of West Berlin.
  While the division of Germany and Berlin appeared to be permanent, the
Soviet policies of “Glasnost” and “Perestroika” introduced by Mikhail Gor-
bachev in 1985 started a process of opening up of Eastern Europe.14 As part
of this wider transformation, large-scale demonstrations in East Germany in
1989 led to the fall of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989. In the aftermath
of these events, the East German system rapidly began to disintegrate. Only
eleven months later, East and West Germany were formally reunified on 3 Oc-
tober 1990. In June 1991, the German parliament voted to relocate the seat of
the parliament and many of the federal ministries back to Berlin. As East and
West Berlin again became part of the same city, suburban and underground

   14
      After the signing of the Basic Treaty (“Grundlagenvertrag”) in December 1972, which recog-
nized “two German states in one German Nation,” East and West Germany were accepted as full
members of the United Nations. West German opinion polls in the 1980s show that less than 10
percent of respondents expected a reunification to occur during their lifetime (Herdegen (1992)).
2136                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

rail lines and utility networks were rapidly reconnected. The reunification of
the city was also accompanied by some urban regeneration initiatives and we
include controls for these policies in our empirical analysis below.

                                 3. THEORETICAL MODEL
   To guide our empirical analysis, we develop a model in which the internal
structure of the city is driven by a tension between agglomeration forces (in
the form of production and residential externalities) and dispersion forces (in
the form of commuting costs and an inelastic supply of land).15
   We consider a city embedded within a wider economy. The city consists of
a set of discrete locations or blocks, which are indexed by i = 1     S. Each
block has an effective supply of floor space Li . Floor space can be used com-
mercially or residentially, and we denote the endogenous fractions of floor
space allocated to commercial and residential use by θi and 1 − θi , respectively.
   The city is populated by an endogenous measure of H workers, who are per-
fectly mobile within the city and the larger economy, which provides a reser-
vation level of utility Ū. Workers decide whether or not to move to the city
before observing idiosyncratic utility shocks for each possible pair of residence
and employment blocks within the city. If a worker decides to move to the city,
he or she observes these realizations for idiosyncratic utility, and picks the pair
of residence and employment blocks within the city that maximizes his or her
utility. Firms produce a single final good, which is costlessly traded within the
city and the larger economy, and is chosen as the numeraire (p = 1).16
   Blocks differ in terms of their final goods productivity, residential amenities,
supply of floor space, and access to the transport network, which determines
travel times between any two blocks in the city. We first develop the model with
exogenous values of these location characteristics, before introducing endoge-
nous agglomeration forces below.

                                         3.1. Workers
   Workers are risk neutral and have preferences that are linear in a consump-
tion index: Uijo = Cijo , where Cijo denotes the consumption index for worker
o residing in block i and working in block j.17 This consumption index de-

   15
      A more detailed discussion of the model and the technical derivations of all expressions and
results reported in this section are contained in the Supplemental Material (Ahlfeldt, Redding,
Sturm, and Wolf (2015)).
   16
      We follow the canonical urban model in assuming a single tradable final good and examine
the ability of this canonical model to account quantitatively for the observed impact of division
and reunification, though the model can be extended to allow for the consumption of nontraded
goods by both workplace and residence.
   17
      To simplify the exposition, throughout the paper, we index a worker’s block of residence by i
or r and her block of employment by j or s unless otherwise indicated.
                               THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                    2137

pends on consumption of the single final good (cijo ); consumption of residen-
tial floor space (ijo ); residential amenities (Bi ) that capture common charac-
teristics that make a block a more or less attractive place to live (e.g., leafy
streets and scenic views); the disutility from commuting from residence block
i to workplace block j (dij ≥ 1); and an idiosyncratic shock that is specific to
individual workers and varies with the worker’s blocks of employment and res-
idence (zijo ). This idiosyncratic shock captures the idea that individual workers
can have idiosyncratic reasons for living and working in different parts of the
city. In particular, the aggregate consumption index is assumed to take the
Cobb–Douglas form:18
                            β        1−β
                    Bi zijo cijo   ijo
(1)        Cijo =                                      0 < β < 1
                     dij     β    1−β

where the iceberg commuting cost dij = eκτij ∈ [1 ∞) increases with the travel
time (τij ) between blocks i and j. Travel time is measured in minutes and is
computed based on the transport network, as discussed further in Section 4
below. The parameter κ controls the size of commuting costs.
   We model the heterogeneity in the utility that workers derive from living and
working in different parts of the city following McFadden (1974) and Eaton
and Kortum (2002). For each worker o living in block i and commuting to block
j, the idiosyncratic component of utility (zijo ) is drawn from an independent
Fréchet distribution:
                                −ε
(2)        F(zijo ) = e−Ti Ej zijo    Ti  Ej > 0 ε > 1

where the scale parameter Ti > 0 determines the average utility derived from
living in block i; the scale parameter Ej determines the average utility derived
from working in block j; and the shape parameter ε > 1 controls the dispersion
of idiosyncratic utility.
   After observing her realizations for idiosyncratic utility for each pair of res-
idence and employment blocks, each worker chooses where to live and work
to maximize her utility, taking as given residential amenities, goods prices, fac-
tor prices, and the location decisions of other workers and firms. Therefore,
workers sort across pairs of residence and employment blocks depending on
their idiosyncratic preferences and the characteristics of these locations. The
indirect utility from residing in block i and working in block j can be expressed
in terms of the wage paid at this workplace (wj ), commuting costs (dij ), the

   18
      For empirical evidence using U.S. data in support of the constant housing expenditure share
implied by the Cobb–Douglas functional form, see Davis and Ortalo-Magné (2011). The role
played by residential amenities in influencing utility is emphasized in the literature following
Roback (1982). See Albouy (2008) for a recent prominent contribution.
2138                      AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

residential floor price (Qi ), the common component of amenities (Bi ), and the
idiosyncratic shock (zijo ):19

                    zijo Bi wj Qiβ−1
(3)        uijo =                    
                           dij

where we have used utility maximization and the choice of the final good as
numeraire.
   Although we model commuting costs in terms of utility, there is an isomor-
phic formulation in terms of a reduction in effective units of labor, because
the iceberg commuting cost dij = eκτij enters the indirect utility function (3)
multiplicatively. As a result, commuting costs are proportional to wages, and
this specification captures changes over time in the opportunity cost of travel
time. Similarly, although we model the heterogeneity in commuting decisions
in terms of an idiosyncratic shock to preferences, there is an isomorphic inter-
pretation in terms of a shock to effective units of labor, because this shock zijo
enters indirect utility (3) multiplicatively with the wage.
   Since indirect utility is a monotonic function of the idiosyncratic shock (zijo ),
which has a Fréchet distribution, it follows that indirect utility for workers liv-
ing in block i and working in block j also has a Fréchet distribution. Each
worker chooses the bilateral commute that offers her the maximum utility,
where the maximum of Fréchet distributed random variables is itself Fréchet
distributed. Using these distributions of utility, the probability that a worker
chooses to live in block i and work in block j is
                                        −ε
                          Ti Ej dij Qi1−β (Bi wj )ε                  Φij
(4)        πij =                                                 ≡       
                    
                    S      S
                                             −ε                    Φ
                               Tr Es drs Qr1−β (Br ws )ε
                    r=1 s=1


  Summing these probabilities across workplaces for a given residence, we ob-
tain the overall probability that a worker resides in block i (πRi ), while sum-
ming these probabilities across residences for a given workplace, we obtain the
overall probability that a worker works in block j (πMi ):

                                  
                                  S
                                                                        
                                                                        S
                                        Φij                                   Φij
                    S
                                  j=1                     
                                                          S
                                                                        i=1
(5)        πRi =          πij =                  πMj =         πij =               
                    j=1
                                    Φ                     i=1
                                                                             Φ

  19
    We make the standard assumption in the urban literature that income from land is accrued
by absentee landlords and not spent within the city, although it is also possible to consider the
case where it is redistributed lump sum to workers.
                                 THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                   2139

These residential and workplace choice probabilities have an intuitive inter-
pretation. The idiosyncratic shock to preferences zijo implies that individual
workers choose different bilateral commutes when faced with the same prices
{Qi  wj }, commuting costs {dij }, and location characteristics {Bi  Ti  Ej }. Other
things equal, workers are more likely to live in block i, the more attractive its
amenities Bi , the higher its average idiosyncratic utility as determined by Ti ,
the lower its residential floor prices Qi , and the lower its commuting costs dij
to employment locations. Other things equal, workers are more likely to work
in block j, the higher its wage wj , the higher its average idiosyncratic utility
as determined by Ej , and the lower its commuting costs dij from residential
locations.
  Conditional on living in block i, the probability that a worker commutes to
block j is
                      Ej (wj /dij )ε
(6)        πij|i =                    
                     
                     S

                       Es (ws /dis )ε
                     s=1

where the terms in {Qi  Ti  Bi } have cancelled from the numerator and denom-
inator. Therefore, the probability of commuting to block j conditional on living
in block i depends on the wage (wj ), average utility draw (Ej ), and commuting
costs (dij ) of employment location j in the numerator (“bilateral resistance”)
as well as the wage (ws ), average utility draw (Es ), and commuting costs (dis )
for all other possible employment locations s in the denominator (“multilateral
resistance”).
   Using these conditional commuting probabilities, we obtain the following
commuting market clearing condition that equates the measure of workers em-
ployed in block j (HMj ) with the measure of workers choosing to commute to
block j:

                     
                     S
                          Ej (wj /dij )ε
(7)        HMj =                          HRi 
                     i=1
                         
                         S

                           Es (ws /dis )ε
                           s=1

where HRi is the measure of residents in block i. Since there is a continuous
measure of workers residing in each location, there is no uncertainty in the
supply of workers to each employment location. Our formulation of workers’
commuting decisions implies that the supply of commuters to each employ-
ment location j in (7) is a continuously increasing function of its wage relative
to other locations.20

  20
     This feature of the model is not only consistent with the gravity equation literature on com-
muting flows discussed above but also greatly simplifies the quantitative analysis of the model.
2140                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

   Expected worker income conditional on living in block i is equal to the wages
in all possible employment locations weighted by the probabilities of commut-
ing to those locations conditional on living in i:

                        S
                             Ej (wj /dij )ε
(8)        E[wj |i] =                         wj 
                        j=1
                            
                            S
                                            ε
                              Es (ws /dis )
                             s=1


Therefore, expected worker income is high in blocks that have low commuting
costs (low dis ) to high-wage employment locations.21
  Finally, population mobility implies that the expected utility from moving to
the city is equal to the reservation level of utility in the wider economy (Ū):
                       S S                                          1/ε
                                                 
                                                 1−β −ε
(9)        E[u] = γ                Tr Es drs Q   r
                                                                 ε
                                                          (Br ws )          = Ū
                        r=1 s=1


where E is the expectations operator and the expectation is taken over the
distribution for the idiosyncratic component of utility; γ = ( ε−1
                                                                ε
                                                                   ) and (·) is
the Gamma function.

                                       3.2. Production
   Production of the tradable final good occurs under conditions of perfect
competition and constant returns to scale.22 For simplicity, we assume that the
production technology takes the Cobb–Douglas form, so that output of the
final good in block j (yj ) is

(10)       yj = Aj HMj
                    α
                       L1−α
                        Mj 


where Aj is final goods productivity and LMj is the measure of floor space used
commercially.

In the absence of heterogeneity in worker preferences, small changes in wages can induce all
workers residing in one location to start or stop commuting to another location, which is both
empirically implausible and complicates the determination of general equilibrium with asymmet-
ric locations.
   21
      For simplicity, we model agents and workers as synonymous and assume that labor is the
only source of income. More generally, it is straightforward to extend the analysis to introduce
families, where each worker has a fixed number of dependents that consume but do not work.
Similarly, we can allow agents to have a constant amount of nonlabor income.
   22
      Even during division, there was substantial trade between West Berlin and West Germany.
In 1963, the ratio of exports to GDP in West Berlin was around 70 percent, with West Germany
the largest trade partner. Overall, industrial production accounted for around 50 percent of West
Berlin’s GDP in this year (American Embassy (1965)).
                                THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                      2141

   Firms choose their block of production and their inputs of workers and com-
mercial floor space to maximize profits, taking as given final goods productiv-
ity Aj , the distribution of idiosyncratic utility, goods and factor prices, and the
location decisions of other firms and workers. Profit maximization implies that
equilibrium employment in block j is increasing in productivity (Aj ), decreas-
ing in the wage (wj ), and increasing in commercial floor space (LMj ):
                        1/(1−α)
                     αAj
(11)       HMj =                  LMj 
                      wj
where the equilibrium wage is determined by the requirement that the demand
for workers in each employment location (11) equals the supply of workers
choosing to commute to that location (7).
  From the first-order conditions for profit maximization and zero profits,
equilibrium commercial floor prices (qj ) in each block with positive employ-
ment must satisfy
                       α/(1−α)
                       α
(12)      qj = (1 − α)           A1/(1−α)
                                   j      
                       wj
Intuitively, firms in blocks with higher productivity (Aj ) and/or lower wages
(wj ) are able to pay higher commercial floor prices and still make zero profits.

                                  3.3. Land Market Clearing
  Land market equilibrium requires no-arbitrage between the commercial and
residential use of floor space after the tax equivalent of land use regulations.
The share of floor space used commercially (θi ) is
(13)      θi = 1      if    qi > ξi Qi 
          θi ∈ [0 1] if        qi = ξi Qi 
          θi = 0      if    qi < ξi Qi 
where ξi ≥ 1 captures one plus the tax equivalent of land use regulations that
restrict commercial land use relative to residential land use. We allow this
wedge between commercial and residential floor prices to vary across blocks.
We assume that the observed price of floor space in the data is the maximum of
the commercial and residential price of floor space: Qi = max{qi  Qi }. Hence,
the relationship between observed, commercial, and residential floor prices
can be summarized as
(14)      Qi = qi         qi > ξi Qi     θi = 1
          Qi = qi         qi = ξi Qi     θi ∈ [0 1]
          Q i = Qi        qi < ξi Qi     θi = 0
2142                  AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

   We follow the standard approach in the urban literature of assuming that
floor space L is supplied by a competitive construction sector that uses land K
and capital M as inputs. Following Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2014)
and Epple, Gordon, and Sieg (2010), we assume that the production function
takes the Cobb–Douglas form: Li = Miμ Ki1−μ .23 Therefore, the corresponding
dual cost function for floor space is Qi = μ−μ (1 − μ)−(1−μ) Pμ R1−μ
                                                                   i   , where Qi =
max{qi  Qi } is the price for floor space, P is the common price for capital across
all blocks, and Ri is the price for land. Since the price for capital is the same
across all locations, the relationships between the quantities and prices of floor
space and land can be summarized as

(15)       Li = ϕi Ki1−μ 
(16)       Qi = χR1−μ
                  i   

where we refer to ϕi = Miμ as the density of development (since it determines
the relationship between floor space and land area) and χ is a constant.
   Residential land market clearing implies that the demand for residential
floor space equals the supply of floor space allocated to residential use in each
location: (1 − θi )Li . Using utility maximization for each worker and taking ex-
pectations over the distribution for idiosyncratic utility, this residential land
market clearing condition can be expressed as

                                     E[ws |i]HRi
(17)       E[i ]HRi = (1 − β)                   = (1 − θi )Li 
                                        Qi

Commercial land market clearing requires that the demand for commercial
floor space equals the supply of floor space allocated to commercial use in
each location: θj Lj . Using the first-order conditions for profit maximization,
this commercial land market clearing condition can be written as
                          1/α
               (1 − α)Aj
(18)                              HMj = θj Lj 
                   qj

When both residential and commercial land market clearing ((17) and (18),
respectively) are satisfied, total demand for floor space equals the total supply
of floor space:

(19)       (1 − θi )Li + θi Li = Li = ϕi Ki1−μ 

  23
    Empirically, we find that this Cobb–Douglas assumption is consistent with confidential micro
data on property transactions for Berlin from 2000 to 2012, as discussed in the Supplemental
Material.
                                THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                2143

          3.4. General Equilibrium With Exogenous Location Characteristics
   We begin by characterizing the properties of a benchmark version of
the model in which location characteristics are exogenous, before relax-
ing this assumption to introduce endogenous agglomeration forces. Given
the model’s parameters {α β μ ε κ}, the reservation level of utility in
the wider economy Ū, and vectors of exogenous location characteristics
{T E A B ϕ K ξ τ}, the general equilibrium of the model is referenced by
the six vectors {π M  π R  Q q w θ} and total city population H.24 These seven
components of the equilibrium vector are determined by the following system
of seven equations: population mobility (9), the residential choice probabil-
ity (πRi in (5)), the workplace choice probability (πMj in (5)), commercial land
market clearing (18), residential land market clearing (17), profit maximization
and zero profits (12), and no-arbitrage between alternative uses of land (13).

   PROPOSITION 1: Assuming exogenous, finite, and strictly positive location char-
acteristics (Ti ∈ (0 ∞), Ei ∈ (0 ∞), ϕi ∈ (0 ∞), Ki ∈ (0 ∞), ξi ∈ (0 ∞),
τij ∈ (0 ∞) × (0 ∞)), and exogenous, finite, and nonnegative final goods pro-
ductivity Ai ∈ [0 ∞) and residential amenities Bi ∈ [0 ∞), there exists a unique
general equilibrium vector {π M  π R  H Q q w, θ}.

   PROOF: See Lemmas S.1–S.3 and the proofs of Propositions S.1–S.2 in Sec-
tion S.2 of the Supplemental Material (Ahlfeldt et al. (2015)).     Q.E.D.

   In this case of exogenous location characteristics, there are no agglomera-
tion forces, and hence the model’s congestion forces of commuting costs and
an inelastic supply of land ensure the existence of a unique equilibrium. We es-
tablish a number of other properties of the general equilibrium with exogenous
location characteristics in the Supplemental Material. Assuming that all other
location characteristics {T E ϕ K ξ τ} are exogenous, finite, and strictly pos-
itive, a necessary and sufficient condition for zero residents is Bi = 0. Similarly,
a necessary and sufficient condition for zero employment is wj = 0, which in
turn requires zero final goods productivity Aj = 0. Therefore, the model ra-
tionalizes zero workplace employment with zero productivity (Ai ) and zero
residence employment with zero amenities (Bi ).

                           3.5. Introducing Agglomeration Forces
   Having established the properties of the model with exogenous location
characteristics, we now introduce endogenous agglomeration forces. We allow
final goods productivity to depend on production fundamentals (aj ) and pro-
duction externalities (Υj ). Production fundamentals capture features of phys-
ical geography that make a location more or less productive independently of

  24
       Throughout the following, we use bold math font to denote vectors or matrices.
2144                    AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

the surrounding density of economic activity (e.g., access to natural water).
Production externalities impose structure on how the productivity of a given
block is affected by the characteristics of other blocks. Specifically, we follow
the standard approach in urban economics of modeling these externalities as
depending on the travel-time weighted sum of workplace employment density
in surrounding blocks:25

                                     
                                     S                     
                                                        HMs
(20)        Aj = aj Υjλ      Υj ≡         e−δτjs             
                                     s=1
                                                        Ks

where HMs /Ks is workplace employment density per unit of land area; pro-
duction externalities decline with travel time (τjs ) through the iceberg factor
e−δτjs ∈ (0 1]; δ determines their rate of spatial decay; and λ controls their
relative importance in determining overall productivity.26
   We model the externalities in workers’ residential choices analogously to
the externalities in firms’ production choices. We allow residential amenities
to depend on residential fundamentals (bi ) and residential externalities (Ωi ).
Residential fundamentals capture features of physical geography that make a
location a more or less attractive place to live independently of the surround-
ing density of economic activity (e.g., green areas). Residential externalities
again impose structure on how the amenities in a given block are affected by
the characteristics of other blocks. Specifically, we adopt a symmetric speci-
fication as for production externalities, and model residential externalities as
depending on the travel-time weighted sum of residential employment density
in surrounding blocks:

                                     
                                     S                     
                                                        HRr
(21)        Bi = bi Ωηi     Ωi ≡          e−ρτir             
                                     r=1
                                                        Kr

where HRr /Kr is residence employment density per unit of land area; resi-
dential externalities decline with travel time (τir ) through the iceberg factor
e−ρτir ∈ (0 1]; ρ determines their rate of spatial decay; and η controls their
relative importance in overall residential amenities. The parameter η cap-
tures the net effect of residence employment density on amenities, including
negative spillovers such as air pollution and crime, and positive externalities

  25
       While the canonical interpretation of these production externalities in the urban economics
literature is knowledge spillovers, as in Alonso (1964), Fujita and Ogawa (1982), Lucas (2000),
Mills (1967), Muth (1969), and Sveikauskas (1975), other interpretations are possible, as consid-
ered in Duranton and Puga (2004).
    26
       We make the standard assumption that production externalities depend on employment den-
sity per unit of land area Ki (rather than per unit of floor space Li ) to capture the role of higher
ratios of floor space to land area in increasing the surrounding concentration of economic activity.
                             THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                         2145

through the availability of urban amenities. Although η captures the direct ef-
fect of higher residence employment density on utility through amenities, there
are clearly other general equilibrium effects through floor prices, commuting
times, and wages.
   The introduction of these agglomeration forces generates the potential for
multiple equilibria in the model if these agglomeration forces are sufficiently
strong relative to the exogenous differences in characteristics across locations.
An important feature of our empirical approach is that it explicitly addresses
the potential for multiple equilibria, as discussed further in the next subsection.


                       3.6. Recovering Location Characteristics
  We now show that there is a unique mapping from the observed variables to
unobserved location characteristics. These unobserved location characteristics
include production and residential fundamentals and several other unobserved
variables. Since a number of these unobserved variables enter the model iso-
morphically, we define the following composites denoted by a tilde:

          Ãi = Ai Eiα/ε     ãi = ai Eiα/ε 
          B̃i = Bi Ti1/ε ζRi
                          1−β
                                  b̃i = bi Ti1/ε ζRi
                                                   1−β
                                                       
          w̃i = wi Ei1/ε 
                                  
          ϕ̃i = ϕ̃i ϕi  Ei1/ε  ξi 

where we use i to index all blocks; the function ϕ̃i (·) is defined in the Sup-
plemental Material; ζRi = 1 for completely specialized residential blocks; and
ζRi = ξi for residential blocks with some commercial land use.
   In the labor market, the adjusted wage for each employment location (w̃i )
captures the wage (wi ) and the Fréchet scale parameter for that location (Ei1/ε ),
because these both affect the relative attractiveness of an employment location
to workers. On the production side, adjusted productivity for each employ-
ment location (Ãi ) captures productivity (Ai ) and the Fréchet scale parameter
for that location (Eiα/ε ), because these both affect the adjusted wage consis-
tent with zero profits. Adjusted production fundamentals are defined analo-
gously. On the consumption side, adjusted amenities for each residence loca-
tion (B̃i ) capture amenities (Bi ), the Fréchet scale parameter for that loca-
tion (Ti1/ε ), and the relationship between observed and residential floor prices
(ζRi ∈ {1 ξi }), because these all affect the relative attractiveness of a location
consistent with population mobility. Adjusted residential fundamentals are de-
fined analogously. Finally, in the land market, the adjusted density of develop-
ment (ϕ̃i ) includes the density of development (ϕi ) and other production and
residential parameters that affect land market clearing.
2146                 AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

   PROPOSITION 2: (i) Given known values for the parameters {α β μ ε κ} and
the observed data {Q HM  HR  K τ}, there exist unique vectors of the unobserved
location characteristics {Ã∗  B̃∗  ϕ̃∗ } that are consistent with the data being an
equilibrium of the model.
   (ii) Given known values for the parameters {α β μ ε κ λ δ η ρ} and the
observed data {Q HM  HR  K τ}, there exist unique vectors of the unobserved lo-
cation characteristics {ã∗  b̃∗  ϕ̃∗ } that are consistent with the data being an equi-
librium of the model.

 PROOF: See the proofs of Propositions S.3–S.4 in Section S.3 of the Supple-
mental Material.                                                      Q.E.D.

   To interpret this identification result, note that in models with multiple equi-
libria, the mapping from the parameters and fundamentals to the endogenous
variables is nonunique. In such models, the inverse mapping from the endoge-
nous variables and parameters to the fundamentals in principle can be either
unique or nonunique.
   In the context of our model, Proposition 2 conditions on the parameters
{α β μ ε κ λ δ η ρ} and a combination of observed endogenous variables
{Q HM  HR } and fundamentals {K τ}, and uses the equilibrium conditions of
the model to determine unique values of the unobserved adjusted fundamen-
tals {ã b̃ ϕ̃}. This identification result hinges on the data available. In the
absence of any one of the five observed variables (floor prices, workplace
employment, residence employment, land area, and travel times), these un-
observed adjusted fundamentals would be under-identified, and could not be
determined without making further structural assumptions.
   The economics underlying this identification result are as follows. Given ob-
served workplace and residence employment, and our measures of travel times,
worker commuting probabilities can be used to solve for unique adjusted wages
consistent with commuting market clearing (7). Given adjusted wages and ob-
served floor prices, the firm cost function can be used to solve for the unique
adjusted productivity consistent with zero profits (12). Given adjusted wages,
observed floor prices and residence employment shares, worker utility maxi-
mization and population mobility can be used to solve for the unique adjusted
amenities consistent with residential choice probabilities (5). Hence the model
has a recursive structure, in which overall adjusted productivity and amenities
{Ã B̃} can be determined without making assumptions about the functional
form or relative importance of externalities {Υ  Ω} and adjusted fundamen-
tals {ã b̃}. Having recovered overall adjusted productivity and amenities, we
can use our spillovers specification to decompose these variables into their
two components of externalities and adjusted fundamentals ((20) and (21)).
Finally, given observed land area, the implied demands for commercial and
residential floor space can be used to solve for the unique adjusted density of
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                       2147

development consistent with market clearing for floor space (19). Therefore,
the observed data, parameters, and equilibrium conditions of the model can
be used to determine unique values of the unobserved adjusted fundamentals
regardless of whether the model has a single equilibrium or multiple equilibria.
  In our structural estimation of the model in Section 7, we use Proposition 2
as an input into our generalized method of moments (GMM) estimation, in
which we determine both the parameters and the unobserved adjusted funda-
mentals.

                         3.7. Berlin’s Division and Reunification
   We focus in our empirical analysis on West Berlin, since it remained a
market-based economy after division and we therefore expect the mecha-
nisms in the model to apply.27 We capture the division of Berlin in the model
by assuming infinite costs of trading the final good, infinite commuting costs
(κ → ∞), infinite rates of decay of production externalities (δ → ∞), and infi-
nite rates of decay of residential externalities (ρ → ∞) across the Berlin Wall.
   The model points to four key channels through which division affects the
distribution of economic activity within West Berlin: a loss of employment
opportunities in East Berlin, a loss of commuters from East Berlin, a loss of
production externalities from East Berlin, and a loss of residential externali-
ties from East Berlin. Each of these four effects reduces the expected utility
from living in West Berlin, and hence reduces its overall population, as work-
ers out migrate to West Germany. As both commuting and externalities de-
cay with travel time, each of these effects is stronger for parts of West Berlin
close to employment and residential concentrations in East Berlin, reducing
floor prices, workplace employment, and residence employment in these parts
of West Berlin relative to those elsewhere in West Berlin. The mechanisms
that restore equilibrium in the model are changes in wages and floor prices.
Workplace and residence employment reallocate across locations within West
Berlin and to West Germany, until wages and floor prices have adjusted such
that firms make zero profits in all locations with positive production, work-
ers are indifferent across all populated locations, and there are no-arbitrage
opportunities in reallocating floor space between commercial and residential
use.
   Since reunification involves a reintegration of West Berlin with employment
and residential concentrations in East Berlin, we would expect to observe the
reverse pattern of results in response to reunification. But reunification need
not necessarily have exactly the opposite effects from division. As discussed
above, if agglomeration forces are sufficiently strong relative to the differ-
ences in fundamentals across locations, there can be multiple equilibria in the

   27
      In contrast, the distribution of economic activity in East Berlin during division was heavily
influenced by central planning, which is unlikely to mimic market forces.
2148                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

model. In this case, division could shift the distribution of economic activity in
West Berlin between multiple equilibria, and reunification need not necessar-
ily reverse the impact of division. More generally, the level and distribution of
economic activity within East Berlin could have changed between the pre-war
and division periods, so that reunification is a different shock from division.
Notwithstanding these points, reintegration with employment and residential
concentrations in East Berlin is predicted to raise relative floor prices, work-
place employment, and residence employment in the areas of West Berlin close
to those concentrations.

                                   4. DATA DESCRIPTION
   The quantitative analysis of our model requires four key sets of data: work-
place employment, residence employment, the price of floor space, and com-
muting times between locations. We have compiled these variables for Berlin
for the pre-war and reunification periods and for West Berlin for the division
period. For simplicity, we generally refer to the three years for which we have
data as 1936, 1986, and 2006 even though some of the data are from the closest
available neighboring year. In addition to these main variables, we have com-
piled data on a wide range of other block characteristics: commuting behavior,
the dispersion of wages across districts, and also the price of floor space in 1928
and 1966. Below, we briefly describe the data definitions and sources. A more
detailed discussion is included in the Supplemental Material.
   Data for Berlin are available at a number of different levels of spatial disag-
gregation. The finest available disaggregation is statistical blocks (“Blöcke”).
In 2006, the surface of Berlin was partitioned into 15,937 blocks, of which just
under 9,000 are in the former West Berlin. We hold this block structure con-
stant for all years in our data. These blocks have a mean area of about 50,000
square meters and an average 2005 population of 274 for the 12,192 blocks
with positive 2005 population.28 Blocks can be aggregated up to larger spatial
units including statistical areas (“Gebiete”) and districts (“Bezirke”).29
   Our measure of employment at the place of work for the reunifica-
tion period is a count of the 2003 social security employment (“Sozialver-
sicherungspflichtig Beschäftigte”) in each block, which was provided by the
Statistical Office of Berlin (“Senatsverwaltung für Berlin”) in electronic form.
We scale up social security employment in each block by the ratio of social
security employment to total employment for Berlin as a whole. Data for the

   28
      There are a number of typically larger blocks that only contain water areas, forests, parks,
and other uninhabited areas. Approximately 29 percent of the area of Berlin in 2006 is covered
by forests and parks, while another 7 percent is accounted for by lakes, rivers, and canals (Office
for Statistics Berlin-Brandenburg (2007)).
   29
      As discussed in Section 2, we use the 1938 district boundaries upon which the occupation
sectors were based unless otherwise indicated.
                                THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                          2149

division period come from the 1987 West German census, which reports to-
tal workplace employment by block.30 We construct comparable data for the
pre-war period by combining data on district total private-sector workplace
employment published in the 1933 census with the registered addresses of
all firms on the Berlin company register (“Handelsregister”) in 1931. As de-
scribed in detail in the Supplemental Material, we use the number of firms
in each block to allocate the 1933 district totals for private-sector workplace
employment across blocks within districts. Finally, we allocate 1933 public-
sector workplace employment across blocks using detailed information on the
location of public administration buildings (including ministries, utilities, and
schools) immediately prior to the Second World War.
   To construct employment at the place of residence for the reunification pe-
riod, we use data on the population of each block in 2005 from the Statistical
Office of Berlin and scale the population data using district-level information
on labor force participation.31 Employment at residence for the division period
is reported by block in the 1987 West German census. To construct pre-war
data on employment at residence, we use a tabulation in the 1933 census that
lists the population of each street or segment of street in Berlin. As described
in more detail in the Supplemental Material, we use a concordance between
streets and blocks to allocate the population of streets to individual blocks. We
then again use labor force participation rates at the district level to scale the
population data to obtain employment at residence by block.
   Berlin has a long history of providing detailed assessments of land values,
which have been carried out by the independent Committee of Valuation Ex-
perts (“Gutachterausschuss für Grundstückswerte”) in the post-war period.
The committee currently has 50 members who are building surveyors, real es-
tate practitioners, and architects. Our land price data for 1986 and 2006 are the
land values (“Bodenrichtwerte”) per square meter of land published by the
Committee on detailed maps of Berlin which we have digitized and merged
with the block structure. The Committee’s land values capture the fair mar-
ket value of a square meter of land if it was undeveloped. While the Com-
mittee does not publish the details of its valuation procedure, the land values
are based on recent market transactions. As a check on the Committee’s land
values, we compare them to confidential micro data on property transactions
from 2000 to 2012. As shown in the Supplemental Material, we find a high cor-
relation between the land values reported by the Committee for 2006 and the
land values that we compute from the property transactions data. Finally, the

   30
      For 2003, only social security employment and not total employment is available at the block
level. The main difference between these two measures of employment is self-employment. Em-
pirically, we find that the ratio of social security to total employment in 1987 is relatively constant
across districts (the correlation coefficient between the two variables is over 0.98), which supports
our approach for 2003 of scaling up social security employment to total employment.
   31
      Empirically, labor force participation is relatively constant across districts within Berlin in all
years of our data set.
2150                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

land value data also include information on the typical density of development,
measured as the ratio of floor space to ground area (“GFZ”).32
   Our source of land price data for the pre-war period is Kalweit (1937).
Kalweit was a chartered building surveyor (“Gerichtlich Beeideter Bausachver-
ständiger”), who received a government commission for the assessment of land
values in Berlin (“Baustellenwerte”) for 1936. These land values were intended
to provide official and representative guides for private and public investors in
Berlin’s real estate market. As with the modern land value data, they capture
the fair market price of a square meter of undeveloped land and are reported
for each street or segment of street in Berlin. Using ArcGIS, we matched the
streets or segments of streets in Kalweit (1937) to blocks, and aggregated the
street-level land price data to the block-level.33 To convert land prices (Ri ) to
floor prices (Qi ), we use the assumption of a competitive construction sector
with a Cobb–Douglas technology, as discussed in Section 3.3 above.
   Travel times are measured in minutes based on the transport network avail-
able in each year and assumed average travel speeds for each mode of trans-
port. To determine travel times between each of the 15,937 blocks in our data,
that is, nearly 254 million (15,937×15,937) bilateral connections, we distin-
guish between travel times by public transport and car. As described in more
detail in the Supplemental Material, we construct minimum travel times by
public transport for the three years using information on the underground rail-
way (“U-Bahn”), suburban railway (“S-Bahn”), tram (“Strassenbahn”), and
bus (“Bus”) network of Berlin in each year. We use ArcGIS to compute the
fastest connection between each pair of blocks allowing passengers to combine
all modes of public transport and walking to minimize travel time. We also con-
struct minimum driving times by car in 1986 and 2006 using an ArcGIS shape
file of the street network of Berlin. For 1986 and 2006, we measure overall
travel times by weighting public transport and car minimum travel times us-
ing district-level data on the proportion of journeys undertaken with these two
modes of transport. For 1936, commuting to work by car was rare, and hence
we use public transport minimum travel times.34
   In addition to our main variables, we have compiled a number of other data,
which are described in detail in the Supplemental Material. First, we have data
on observable block characteristics, including the location of parks and other

   32
      Note that the Committee’s land values are completely different from the unit values (“Ein-
heitswerte”) used to calculate property taxes. The current unit values are still based on an as-
sessment (“Hauptfeststellung”) that took place as early as 1964 for the former West Germany
and 1935 for the former East Germany. In contrast, the Committee’s land values are based on
contemporaneous market transactions and are regularly updated.
   33
      In robustness checks, we also use land value data for 1928 from Kalweit (1929) (which has
the same structure as Kalweit (1937)), and for 1966 from the Committee of Valuation Experts
(which has the same structure as the 1986 and 2006 data).
   34
      Leyden (1933) reported data on travel by mode of transport in pre-war Berlin, in which travel
by car accounts for less than 10 percent of all journeys.
                         THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                            2151

green spaces, proximity to lakes, rivers and canals, proximity to schools, land
use, average noise level, the number of listed buildings, the extent of destruc-
tion during the Second World War, and urban regeneration programs and gov-
ernment buildings post reunification. Second, we have obtained survey data on
commuting flows in Berlin in 1936, 1982, and 2008. Third, we have obtained
data on average wages by workplace for each district of West Berlin in 1986.

                         5. REDUCED-FORM RESULTS
  In this section, we provide reduced-form evidence in support of the model’s
qualitative predictions that complements our later structural estimation of the
model. First, we use this reduced-form analysis to establish reorientations of
land prices, workplace employment, and residence employment within West
Berlin following division and reunification without imposing the full structure
of the model. Second, this reduced-form analysis enables us to demonstrate the
robustness of these reorientations to the inclusion of a wide range of controls
and provide evidence against alternative possible explanations.

             5.1. Evolution of the Land Price Gradient Over Time
   In Figure 2, we display the spatial distribution of land prices across blocks
for each year as a three-dimensional map. The main public parks and forests
are shown in green and the main bodies of water are shown in blue. White
areas correspond to other undeveloped areas including railways. Since we use
the same vertical scale for each figure, and land prices are normalized to have
a mean of 1 in each year, the levels of the land price surfaces in each figure are
comparable.
   As apparent from Panel A of Figure 2, Berlin’s land price gradient in 1936
was in fact approximately monocentric, with the highest values concentrated in
the district Mitte. We measure the center of the pre-war Central Business Dis-
trict (CBD) as the intersection of Friedrich Strasse and Leipziger Strasse, close
to the underground station City Center (“Stadtmitte”). Around this central
point, there are concentric rings of progressively lower land prices surround-
ing the pre-war CBD. Towards the Western edge of these concentric rings is
the Kudamm (“Kurfürstendamm”) in Charlottenburg and Wilmersdorf, which
had developed into a fashionable shopping area in the decades leading up to
the Second World War. This area lies to the West of the Tiergarten Park, which
explains the gap in land prices between the Kudamm and Mitte. Panel A also
shows the future line of the Berlin Wall (shown in gray font), including the
inner boundary between East and West Berlin and the outer boundary that
separated West Berlin from its East German hinterland.
   To show relative land values in locations that subsequently became part of
West Berlin, Panel B displays the 1936 distribution of land prices for only these
locations. The two areas of West Berlin with the highest pre-war land prices
                                                              2152




                                                              AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF




FIGURE 2.—The evolution of land prices in Berlin over time.
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                     2153

were parts of a concentric ring around the pre-war CBD: the area around the
Kudamm discussed above and a second area just west of Potsdamer Platz and
the future line of the Berlin Wall. This second area was a concentration of
commercial and retail activity surrounding the “Anhalter Bahnhof” mainline
and suburban rail station. Neither of these areas contained substantial gov-
ernment administration, which was instead concentrated in Mitte in the future
East Berlin, particularly around Wilhelmstrasse.
   In Panel C, we examine the impact of division by displaying the 1986 distri-
bution of land prices for West Berlin. Comparing Panels B and C, three main
features stand out. First, land prices exhibit less dispersion and smaller peak
values in West Berlin during division than in Berlin during the pre-war pe-
riod. Second, one of the pre-war land price peaks in West Berlin—the area just
West of Potsdamer Platz—is entirely eliminated following division, as this area
ceased to be an important center of commercial and retail activity. Third, West
Berlin’s CBD during division coincided with the other area of high pre-war
land values in West Berlin around the Kudamm, which was relatively centrally
located within West Berlin.
   To examine the impact of reunification, Panel D displays the 2006 distribu-
tion of land prices across blocks within Berlin as a whole, while Panel E shows
the same distribution but only for blocks in the former West Berlin. Compar-
ing these two figures with the previous two figures, three main features are
again apparent. First, land prices are more dispersed and have higher peak
values following reunification than during division. Second, the area just West
of Potsdamer Platz is reemerging as a concentration of office and retail devel-
opment with high land values. Third, Mitte is also reemerging as a center of
high land values. As in the pre-war period, the main government ministries are
concentrated either in Mitte in the former East Berlin or around the federal
parliament (“Reichstag”).
   Figures A.1 and A.2 in the Technical Data Appendix display the log differ-
ence in land prices from 1936 to 1986 and 1986 to 2006 for each block. As
evident from these figures, the largest declines in land prices following division
and the largest increases in land prices following reunification are along those
segments of the Berlin Wall around the pre-war CBD. In contrast, there is lit-
tle evidence of comparable declines in land prices along other sections of the
Berlin Wall. Therefore, these results provide some first evidence that it is not
proximity to the Berlin Wall per se that matters, but the loss of access to the
pre-war CBD.35


   35
      Regressing the growth in West Berlin floor prices from 1986 to 2006 on their growth from
1936 to 1986, we find an estimated coefficient (Conley (1999) standard error) of −0262 (0.017)
and an R2 of 0.29, suggesting that the areas that experienced the largest decline in floor prices
after division also experienced the largest growth in floor prices after reunification.
2154                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

                         5.2. Difference-in-Difference Estimates
  To establish the statistical significance of these findings and their robust-
ness to the inclusion of controls, we estimate the following “difference-in-
difference” specification for division and reunification separately:

                             K

(22)        ln Oi = α +           Iik βk + ln Mi γ + ui 
                             k=1

where i denotes blocks;  ln Oi is the log change in an economic outcome of
interest (floor prices, workplace employment, residence employment); α is a
constant; Iik is an indicator variable for whether block i lies within a distance
grid cell k from the pre-war CBD; βk are coefficients to be estimated; Mi are
time-invariant observable block characteristics (such as proximity to parks and
lakes) and γ captures changes over time in the premium to these time-invariant
observable block characteristics; and ui is a stochastic error. This specification
allows for time-invariant factors that have constant effects over time, which are
differenced out before and after division (or reunification). It also allows for
a common time effect of division or reunification across all blocks, which is
captured in the constant α.
   We begin by considering distance grid cells of 500 meter intervals. Since the
minimum distance to the pre-war CBD in West Berlin is around 0.75 kilome-
ters, our first distance grid cell is for blocks with distances less than 1.25 kilo-
meters. We include grid cells for blocks with distances up to 3.25–3.75 kilome-
ters, so that the excluded category is blocks more than 3.75 kilometers from
the pre-war CBD.36 This grid cells specification allows for a flexible functional
form for the relationship between changes in block economic outcomes and
distance from the pre-war CBD. In these reduced-form regressions, we take
the location of the pre-war CBD as given, whereas in the structural model its
location is endogenously determined. In Section 5.3, we show that we find sim-
ilar results using other nonparametric approaches that do not require us to
specify grid cells, such as locally weighted linear least squares.
   We show that our results are robust to two alternative approaches to control-
ling for spatial correlation in the error term ui . As our baseline specification
throughout the paper, we report Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Con-
sistent (HAC) standard errors following Conley (1999), which allow for spatial
correlation in the errors across neighboring blocks with distances less than a
specified threshold.37 As a robustness check, the Technical Data Appendix re-
ports standard errors clustered on statistical areas (“Gebiete”), which allows

   36
      The numbers of West Berlin blocks with floor price data in all three years in each grid cell
(from nearest to furthest from the pre-war CBD) are: 23, 37, 50, 84, 146, and 173. The maximum
distance to the pre-war CBD in West Berlin is around 23 kilometers.
   37
      We use a threshold of 0.5 kilometers, where the median block in Berlin has 19 other blocks
within 0.5 kilometers.
                               THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                        2155

for a general correlation structure in the errors across blocks within areas, but
assumes that the errors are independent across areas (see, e.g., Bertrand, Du-
flo, and Mullainathan (2004)).
   Table I reports the results of estimating our baseline specification (22) for
division.38 The dependent variable in Columns (1)–(5) is the log difference in
the price of floor space from 1936 to 1986. In Column (1), we include only
the distance grid cells, and find a negative and statistically significant effect
of proximity to the pre-war CBD, which declines monotonically with distance
from the pre-war CBD. On average, West Berlin blocks within the first grid cell
experience around a 55 percent reduction in the price of floor space between
1936 and 1986 (since 1 − e−0800 = 055) relative to those more than 3.75 kilo-
meters away from the pre-war CBD. Together, the six grid cells alone explain
around one quarter of the variation in the change in the price of floor space
following division (R2 = 026), suggesting a powerful effect of proximity to the
pre-war concentration of economic activity in East Berlin.
   In Column (2), we show that these results are robust to including district
fixed effects, which focuses solely on within-district variation in proximity to
the pre-war CBD. Column (3) examines whether it is really proximity to the
pre-war CBD that matters by including analogous 500 meter grid cells for dis-
tance to the closest point on (a) the inner boundary between East and West
Berlin and (b) the outer boundary between West Berlin and its East German
hinterland (see Table A.2 of the Technical Data Appendix for the coefficients
on these distance grid cells).39 Again we find a negative and statistically signif-
icant effect of proximity to the pre-war CBD that remains of around the same
magnitude. In contrast, the coefficients for the inner boundary grid cells are
close to zero and typically statistically insignificant, while the coefficients for
the outer boundary grid cells are positive and statistically significant (although
substantially smaller in magnitude than those for the pre-war CBD).40

   38
      Table A.1 in the Technical Data Appendix reports the robustness test using standard er-
rors clustered on statistical areas (“Gebiete”) instead of HAC standard errors following Conley
(1999).
   39
      The numbers of West Berlin blocks with floor price data in all three years in each grid cell for
the inner boundary (from nearest to furthest from the inner boundary) are: 286, 329, 355, 297,
226, and 283. The corresponding numbers for the outer boundary are 422, 445, 495, 506, 396,
and 266. Comparing these numbers with those for the pre-war CBD grid cells in footnote 36, it is
clear that the intersection of observations in each pair of grid cells is small relative to the union
of observations in that pair of grid cells, which enables us to separately identify the coefficients
for each grid cell.
   40
      The small positive effects for the outer boundary could reflect a number of considerations.
First, the areas beyond the outer boundary of Berlin are relatively undeveloped, implying lit-
tle loss of access to surrounding economic activity following division. In 1933, total workplace
and residence employment in Berlin were 1,628,622 and 1,591,723, respectively, implying small
net inward commuting of 36,899. Second, there is a general equilibrium shift in economic ac-
tivity within West Berlin following division. As a result, locations along the outer boundary of
West Berlin become closer to the center of economic activity. Third, peak floor prices are lower
                                                                                  TABLE I                                                                                           2156
                                           BASELINE DIVISION DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE RESULTS (1936–1986)a

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)
                                  ln Q            ln Q            ln Q            ln Q           ln Q          ln EmpR         ln EmpR        ln EmpW         ln EmpW
CBD 1                        −0800∗∗∗        −0567∗∗∗        −0524∗∗∗        −0503∗∗∗       −0565∗∗∗        −1332∗∗∗        −0975∗∗∗        −0691∗         −0639∗
                             (0071)          (0071)          (0071)          (0071)         (0077)          (0383)          (0311)          (0408)         (0338)




                                                                                                                                                                                    AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF
CBD 2                        −0655∗∗∗        −0422∗∗∗        −0392∗∗∗        −0360∗∗∗       −0400∗∗∗        −0715∗∗         −0361           −1253∗∗∗       −1367∗∗∗
                             (0042)          (0047)          (0046)          (0043)         (0050)          (0299)          (0280)          (0293)         (0243)
CBD 3                        −0543∗∗∗        −0306∗∗∗        −0294∗∗∗        −0258∗∗∗       −0247∗∗∗        −0911∗∗∗        −0460∗∗         −0341          −0471∗∗
                             (0034)          (0039)          (0037)          (0032)         (0034)          (0239)          (0206)          (0241)         (0190)
CBD 4                        −0436∗∗∗        −0207∗∗∗        −0193∗∗∗        −0166∗∗∗       −0176∗∗∗        −0356∗∗         −0259           −0512∗∗∗       −0521∗∗∗
                             (0022)          (0033)          (0033)          (0030)         (0026)          (0145)          (0159)          (0199)         (0169)
CBD 5                        −0353∗∗∗        −0139∗∗∗        −0123∗∗∗        −0098∗∗∗       −0100∗∗∗        −0301∗∗∗        −0143           −0436∗∗∗       −0340∗∗∗
                             (0016)          (0024)          (0024)          (0023)         (0020)          (0110)          (0113)          (0151)         (0124)
CBD 6                        −0291∗∗∗        −0125∗∗∗        −0094∗∗∗        −0077∗∗∗       −0090∗∗∗        −0360∗∗∗        −0135           −0280∗∗        −0142
                             (0018)          (0019)          (0017)          (0016)         (0016)          (0100)          (0089)          (0130)         (0116)
Inner Boundary 1–6                                                  Yes             Yes              Yes                               Yes                              Yes
Outer Boundary 1–6                                                  Yes             Yes              Yes                               Yes                              Yes
Kudamm 1–6                                                                          Yes              Yes                               Yes                              Yes
Block Characteristics                                                                                Yes                               Yes                              Yes
District Fixed Effects                             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
Observations                     6,260            6,260            6,260           6,260            6,260            5,978            5,978           2,844           2,844
R2                               0.26             0.51             0.63            0.65             0.71             0.19             0.43            0.12            0.33
    a Q denotes the price of floor space. EmpR denotes employment by residence. EmpW denotes employment by workplace. CBD1–CBD6 are six 500 m distance grid cells
for distance from the pre-war CBD. Inner Boundary 1–6 are six 500 m grid cells for distance to the Inner Boundary between East and West Berlin. Outer Boundary 1–6 are
six 500 m grid cells for distance to the outer boundary between West Berlin and East Germany. Kudamm 1–6 are six 500 m grid cells for distance to Breitscheid Platz on the
Kurfürstendamm. The coefficients on the other distance grid cells are reported in Table A.2 of the Technical Data Appendix. Block characteristics include the log distance to
schools, parks and water, the land area of the block, the share of the block’s built-up area destroyed during the Second World War, indicators for residential, commercial and
industrial land use, and indicators for whether a block includes a government building and urban regeneration policies post-reunification. Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation
Consistent (HAC) standard errors in parentheses (Conley (1999)). ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
                                THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                        2157

   Our finding that there is little evidence of a negative treatment effect of
division along segments of the Berlin Wall far from the pre-war CBD suggests
that our results are indeed capturing a loss of access to the pre-war CBD rather
than other considerations associated with being close to the Berlin Wall, such
as its disamenity value. But by themselves these reduced-form regressions do
not distinguish between different explanations for why access to the pre-war
CBD matters, such as loss of access to employment opportunities, production
externalities, and/or residential externalities. In our structural estimation of the
model below, we use the structure of the model to separate out these different
explanations.
   Column (4) shows that we find a similar pattern of results if we also include
analogous 500 meter grid cells for distance to the Kudamm, providing further
evidence that our results are indeed capturing a loss of access to the pre-war
CBD (see Table A.2 of the Technical Data Appendix for the coefficients on
these distance grid cells).41 In Column (5), we further augment the specifica-
tion from Column (4) with a wide range of controls for block characteristics.
Although some of these controls are potentially endogenous to division, we
demonstrate that our results are not driven by their omission by reporting re-
sults both with and without the controls. Our block characteristics include log
distance to the nearest school in 2006, log distance to the nearest lake, river, or
canal in 2006, log distance to the nearest park in 2006, log block area, Second
World War destruction, and indicator variables for land use in 2006, whether a
block qualified for urban regeneration policies post-reunification, and govern-
ment buildings post-reunification.42
   In the next two columns, we report results for employment residence. While
Column (6) includes only our distance grid cells for proximity to the pre-war
CBD and district fixed effects, Column (7) includes all the controls from Col-
umn (5). In both cases, we find that West Berlin blocks close to the pre-war
CBD experienced a decline in employment residence relative to other parts


relative to mean floor prices following division (compare Panels B and C of Figure 2). Since mean
floor prices are constant by construction, this raises floor prices in peripheral locations relative
to central locations. Fourth, there is the usual pattern of new residential developments appearing
around the fringes of an existing city. Consistent with this, we below find positive effects along
the outer boundary for residence employment but not workplace employment.
    41
       Division has several opposing effects on floor prices for locations close to the Kudamm. First,
they lose access to the pre-war CBD to which they were relatively close. Second, the Kudamm
becomes the new center of economic activity in West Berlin. Third, peak floor prices are lower
relative to mean floor prices following division (compare Panels B and C of Figure 2). Since mean
floor prices are constant by construction, this raises floor prices in peripheral locations relative to
central locations. The net effect is small negative coefficients for the Kudamm distance grid cells.
    42
       Our three indicator variables for urban regeneration programs are for whether a block qual-
ified for “Sanierungsgebiet” in 2002, “Sanierungsgebiet” in 2006, and the “Stadtumbau West”
program that was initiated in 2005.
2158                    AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

of West Berlin following division. Columns (8) and (9) demonstrate a similar
pattern of results for employment workplace.43
  In Table II, we report analogous specifications for reunification.44 Consis-
tent with the predictions of the model, we observe the reverse pattern of re-
sults for reunification. In Column (1), we include only the distance grid cells.
We find that West Berlin blocks within the first distance grid cell experience
around a 49 percent increase in the price of floor space between 1986 and
2006 (e0398 − 1 = 049) relative to those more than 3.75 kilometers away from
the pre-war CBD. Together, the six distance grid cells now explain around 8
percent of the observed variation of the change in the price of floor space
(R2 = 008). Columns (2)–(5) show that these results are robust to including
the same set of controls as for division (see Table A.4 of the Technical Data
Appendix for the coefficients on the other distance grid cells). In Columns (6)–
(9), we report results for employment residence and employment workplace.
Again we find statistically significant treatment effects, although these effects
are less precisely estimated than for division.

                                     5.3. Further Evidence
   In Figure 3, we provide additional evidence on the timing of the estimated
treatment effects, and demonstrate the absence of pre-trends. Panels A and
B confirm our distance grid cell results by displaying the log difference in
floor prices for each West Berlin block against distance from the pre-war CBD
for 1936–1986 and 1986–2006, respectively. We also show the locally weighted
linear least squares regression relationships between the two variables. From
comparing Panels A and B, the effects of division are substantially larger and
extend much further into West Berlin than the effects of reunification.
   Panels C and D examine the timing of the division treatment by reporting
results for 1936–1966 and 1966–1986, respectively. Consistent with the rapid
disintegration of economic activity between West and East Berlin in the im-
mediate aftermath of the Second World War, Panel C shows that most of the
treatment effect of division on the price of floor space had already occurred by
1966. Therefore, as shown in Panel D, we find only a small negative treatment
effect of division for 1966–1986.45 These results in Panel D also demonstrate

   43
      Although our identification strategy exploits relative changes across different parts of West
Berlin, we also find that West Berlin’s overall population declines from 2,683,099 to 2,012,709
between the 1933 and 1987 censuses, respectively, consistent with the predictions of the model
discussed in Section 3.7 above.
   44
      Table A.3 in the Technical Data Appendix reports the robustness test using standard er-
rors clustered on statistical areas (“Gebiete”) instead of HAC standard errors following Conley
(1999).
   45
      Tables A.5–A.8 in the Technical Data Appendix corroborate these findings by reestimating
the “difference-in-difference” regression specification (22) for these subperiods. While the divi-
sion treatment is large and statistically significant for 1936–1966 in Tables A.5–A.6, it is small and
typically statistically insignificant for 1966–86 in Tables A.7–A.8.
                                                                                  TABLE II
                                       BASELINE REUNIFICATION DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE RESULTS (1986–2006)a

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)             (9)
                                  ln Q            ln Q            ln Q            ln Q            ln Q          ln EmpR         ln EmpR        ln EmpW        ln EmpW
CBD 1                          0398∗∗∗        0408∗∗∗         0368∗∗∗         0369∗∗∗          0281∗∗∗        1079∗∗∗         1025∗∗∗          1574∗∗∗         1249∗∗
                              (0105)         (0090)          (0083)          (0081)           (0088)         (0307)          (0297)           (0479)          (0517)
CBD 2                          0290∗∗∗        0289∗∗∗         0257∗∗∗         0258∗∗∗          0191∗∗         0589∗           0538∗            0684∗∗          0457
                              (0111)         (0096)          (0090)          (0088)           (0087)         (0315)          (0299)           (0326)          (0334)
CBD 3                          0122∗∗∗        0120∗∗∗         0110∗∗∗         0115∗∗∗          0063∗∗         0340∗           0305∗            0326            0158




                                                                                                                                                                                    THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY
                              (0037)         (0033)          (0032)          (0032)           (0028)         (0180)          (0158)           (0216)          (0239)
CBD 4                          0033∗∗∗        0031            0030            0034             0017           0110            0034             0336∗∗          0261
                              (0013)         (0023)          (0022)          (0021)           (0020)         (0068)          (0066)           (0161)          (0185)
CBD 5                          0025∗∗∗        0018            0020            0020             0015          −0012           −0056             0114            0066
                              (0010)         (0015)          (0014)          (0014)           (0013)         (0056)          (0057)           (0118)          (0131)
CBD 6                          0019∗∗        −0000           −0000           −0003             0005           0060            0053             0049            0110
                              (0009)         (0012)          (0012)          (0012)           (0011)         (0039)          (0041)           (0095)          (0098)
Inner Boundary 1–6                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes                               Yes                              Yes
Outer Boundary 1–6                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes                               Yes                              Yes
Kudamm 1–6                                                                           Yes              Yes                               Yes                              Yes
Block Characteristics                                                                                 Yes                               Yes                              Yes
District Fixed Effects                             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Observations                     7,050            7,050            7,050            7,050            7,050            6,718            6,718           5,602           5,602
R2                               0.08             0.32             0.34             0.35             0.43             0.04             0.07            0.03            0.06
    a Q denotes the price of floor space. EmpR denotes employment by residence. EmpW denotes employment by workplace. CBD1–CBD6 are six 500 m distance grid cells
for distance from the pre-war CBD. Inner Boundary 1–6 are six 500 m grid cells for distance to the Inner Boundary between East and West Berlin. Outer Boundary 1–6 are
six 500 m grid cells for distance to the outer boundary between West Berlin and East Germany. Kudamm 1–6 are six 500 m grid cells for distance to Breitscheid Platz on the
Kurfürstendamm. The coefficients on the other distance grid cells are reported in Table A.4 of the Technical Data Appendix. Block characteristics include the log distance to
schools, parks and water, the land area of the block, the share of the block’s built-up area destroyed during the Second World War, indicators for residential, commercial and
industrial land use, and indicators for whether a block includes a government building and urban regeneration policies post-reunification. Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation
Consistent (HAC) standard errors in parentheses (Conley (1999)). ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
                                                                                                                                                                                    2159
                                                                                                                                            2160




                                                                                                                                            AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF




  FIGURE 3.—Division and reunification treatments and placebos. Note: Log floor prices are normalized to have a mean of zero in each year
before taking the long difference. Solid lines are fitted values from locally-weighted linear least squares regressions.
                           THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                              2161

that the positive treatment effect of reunification in Panel B is not driven by
pre-trends in floor prices in the parts of West Berlin close to the pre-war CBD
prior to reunification. Finally, Panel E displays results for 1928–1936 and shows
that the negative treatment effect of division is not driven by pre-trends in the
parts of West Berlin close to the pre-war CBD prior to the Second World War.
   In Section A.4 of the Technical Data Appendix, we provide further evidence
that the estimated treatment effects of division and reunification are capturing
a loss of access to the surrounding concentration of economic activity using
a different source of variation in the data based on proximity to U/S-Bahn
stations. Taken together, the results of this subsection provide further evidence
in support of the model’s qualitative predictions of a reallocation of economic
activity within West Berlin in response to both division and reunification.

                  6. GRAVITY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND AMENITIES
  In this section, we take a first step towards examining the extent to which
the model can account quantitatively for the observed variation in the data. In
particular, we use the recursive structure of the model discussed in Section 3.6
to recover overall productivity, amenities, and the density of development
just using the model’s gravity equation predictions for commuting flows. This
approach has three advantages. First, we can determine the commuting pa-
rameters {ε κ} using only information on commuting probabilities and wages
and without taking a stand on the values of the agglomeration parameters
{λ δ η ρ}. Hence we can solve for overall adjusted productivity, amenities,
and the density of development {Ãi  B̃i  ϕ̃i } regardless of the relative impor-
tance or functional form of externalities {Υit  Ωit } and fundamentals {ãit  b̃it }.
Second, we can determine the commuting parameters {ε κ} without impos-
ing the full set of identifying assumptions used in the structural estimation in
Section 7 below. Third, we use the solutions for overall adjusted productivity,
amenities, and the density of development {Ãi  B̃i  ϕ̃i } to show that the model
with exogenous location characteristics is unable to explain the observed im-
pact of division and reunification.

                                       6.1. Gravity
  From the commuting probabilities (4), one of the model’s key predictions is a
semi-log gravity equation for commuting flows from residence i to workplace j:

(23)      ln πij = −ντij + ϑi + ςj 

where the residence fixed effects (ϑi ) capture residence characteristics
{Bi  Ti  Qi }; the workplace fixed effects (ςj ) capture workplace characteristics
{wj  Ej }; the denominator in (4) is a constant that is absorbed into the fixed
effects; commuting costs are dij = eκτij ; and travel times τij are measured in
2162                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

minutes. The parameter ν = εκ is the semi-elasticity of commuting flows with
respect to travel times and is a combination of the commuting cost parameter
κ and the commuting heterogeneity parameter ε.
   To provide empirical evidence on these gravity equation predictions, we use
micro data on a representative survey of individual commuters in Berlin for
2008, which report district of residence, district of workplace, and individual
bilateral travel times in minutes for 7,948 commuters. We use these micro sur-
vey data to compute the probability that a worker commutes between any of
the 12 districts of Berlin in 2008, which yields 12 × 12 = 144 pairs of bilateral
commuting probabilities.46 We observe positive commuting probabilities for
all bilateral district pairs, although some district pairs have a small number of
commuters in these micro survey data. While the model uses measures of bilat-
eral travel times that we construct based on the transport network, the micro
survey data include self-reported travel times for each commuter. Therefore,
we augment the gravity equation derived from the model (23) with a stochastic
error that captures measurement error in travel times:

(24)        ln πij = −ντij + ϑi + ςj + eij 

where we assume that this measurement error is uncorrelated with self-
reported travel times.
  The gravity equation (24) yields predictions for commuting probabilities be-
tween pairs of blocks, whereas the commuting survey data report commuting
probabilities between pairs of districts. Taking means across pairs of blocks
within pairs of districts in (24), we estimate the following district-level gravity
equation:

(25)        ln πIJ = −ντIJ + ϑI + ςJ + eIJ 

where I denotes district of residence; J denotes district of employment; τIJ is
the average of the travel times τij ; and we approximate the unobserved mean
of the log block commuting probabilities (the mean of ln πij ) with the observed
log district commuting probabilities (ln πIJ ).47

  46
      The districts reported in the micro survey data are post-2001 districts, as discussed in foot-
note 9.
   47
      As shown in Section A.2 of the Technical Data Appendix, this approximation involves ap-
proximating a mean of logs with the log of a mean. If the bilateral commuting probabilities were
the same for all pairs of blocks within pairs of districts, these two variables would take the same
value. More generally, they differ from one another because of Jensen’s inequality. In the Tech-
nical Data Appendix, we examine the quantitative relevance of this difference, by using the cali-
brated model to compare the results of gravity equations estimated at the block and district level
using data generated from the model. In practice, we find that this discrepancy is small. Estimat-
ing the gravity equation using district-level log commuting probabilities and data generated from
the model under the assumption of ν = 007, we find a semi-elasticity of ν = 00726.
                                      THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                                     2163
                                                       TABLE III
                                      COMMUTING GRAVITY EQUATIONa

                                            (1)                  (2)                   (3)                     (4)
                                        ln Bilateral         ln Bilateral          ln Bilateral            ln Bilateral
                                        Commuting            Commuting             Commuting               Commuting
                                        Probability          Probability           Probability             Probability
                                           2008                 2008                  2008                    2008

Travel Time (−κε)                     −00697∗∗∗           −00702∗∗∗            −00771∗∗∗              −00706∗∗∗
                                      (00056)             (00034)              (00025)                (00026)
Estimation                                 OLS                  OLS              Poisson PML            Gamma PML
More than 10 Commuters                                          Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Fixed Effects                               Yes                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Observations                               144                  122                    122                   122
R2                                        0.8261               0.9059                   –                      –
    a Gravity equation estimates based on representative micro survey data on commuting for Greater Berlin for 2008.
Observations are bilateral pairs of 12 workplace and residence districts (post 2001 Bezirke boundaries). Travel time is
measured in minutes. Fixed effects are workplace district fixed effects and residence district fixed effects. The specifi-
cations labelled more than 10 commuters restrict attention to bilateral pairs with 10 or more commuters. Poisson PML
is Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood estimator. Gamma PML is Gamma Pseudo Maximum Likelihood Estimator.
Standard errors in parentheses are heteroscedasticity robust. ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant
at 1%.



   In Column (1) of Table III, we estimate (25) using a linear fixed effects es-
timator, and find a semi-elasticity of commuting with respect to travel time
of −00697 that is statistically significant at the one percent level. This esti-
mate implies that each additional minute of travel time reduces the flow of
commuters by around 7 percent. From the regression R2 , this gravity equation
specification explains around 83 percent of the variation in bilateral commut-
ing patterns. To address concerns about sampling error for bilateral pairs with
small numbers of commuters in these micro survey data, Column (2) reesti-
mates the same specification restricting attention to bilateral pairs with 10 or
more commuters. We find a semi-elasticity of a similar magnitude of −00702,
which is now more precisely estimated, and the regression R2 rises to 91 per-
cent.
   The remaining two columns of Table III report additional robustness checks
suggested by the international trade literature on gravity equations (see in par-
ticular Head and Mayer (2014)). In Column (3), we estimate the fixed effects
specification from Column (2) using a Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
estimator, and find a semi-elasticity of −00771. In Column (4), we reestimate
the same specification using a Gamma Pseudo Maximum Likelihood estima-
tor, and find a semi-elasticity of −00706. Therefore, across a range of differ-
ent specifications, we find a precisely estimated value of ν = εκ of around 007.
Taken together, these results suggest that the gravity equation predicted by the
model provides a good approximation to observed commuting behavior.
2164                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

   In Panel A of Figure 4, we provide further evidence on the fit of the semi-
elasticity functional form implied by the model using the specification from
Column (2) of Table III. We regress both the log bilateral commuting proba-
bilities and travel times on workplace and residence fixed effects and graph the
residuals from these two regressions against one another. As apparent from
the figure, the semi-elasticity functional form provides a good fit to the data,
with an approximately linear relationship between the two residuals.48
   Using our estimate for ν = εκ = 007, the model’s labor market clearing
condition (7) can be solved for a transformation of wages (ωjt = w̃jtε = Ejt wjtε )
in each location in each year using observed workplace employment (HMjt ),
residence employment (HRit ), and bilateral travel times (τijt ):

                     
                     S
                           ωjt /eντijt
(26)        HMjt =                        HRit 
                      i=1
                          
                          S
                                    ντist
                            ωst /e
                           s=1


Using these solutions for transformed wages, we obtain bilateral commuting
flows in each year (from (6)).
   In Panel B of Figure 4, we compare log commuting probabilities in the model
and micro survey data at the district level. Again we focus on the sample of bi-
lateral pairs with 10 or more commuters in the micro survey data. The model’s
predictions and micro survey data can differ for two sets of reasons. First, the
reduced-form gravity equation does not perfectly fit the micro survey data (the
R2 in Table III is around 0.90). Second, the bilateral travel times in the model
are estimated based on minimum travel time calculations using the transport
network, which need not equal the self-reported travel times in the micro sur-
vey data. Nonetheless, we find a strong relationship between the two sets of
commuting probabilities.
   We now undertake a number of additional over-identification checks. Given
our estimate for ν = εκ = 007 from the gravity equation estimation for 2008,
we use the model to predict commuting flows and construct a cumulative dis-
tribution function of commuters across travel time bins (for example, 20–30
minutes) for all three years of our sample. We compare these predictions of
the model to the corresponding cumulative distribution functions in the data.
For reunification, we use the micro survey data for individual commuters for
2008 used in the gravity equation estimation above. For division, we use sepa-

   48
      The use of reduced-form gravity equations for commuting flows has a long tradition in urban
and regional economics, as reviewed in McDonald and McMillen (2010). Fortheringham and
O’Kelly (1989) argued that the consensus in the literature is that a semi-log specification provides
the best fit to commuting data within cities. A recent contribution to this literature using a semi-
log specification and travel times is McArthur, Kleppe, Thorsen, and Uboe (2011), which found
a similar semi-elasticity of commuting flows with respect to travel times as we find for Berlin.
                                                                    THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY




FIGURE 4.—Commuting parameter estimation and over-identification.   2165
2166                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

rate data on the fractions of workers in discrete travel time bins from a repre-
sentative sample of commuters in West Berlin in 1982. For the pre-war period,
we use the data reported in Feder (1939).
   In Panel C of Figure 4, we show the cumulative distribution functions of com-
muters across the travel time bins in the model and micro survey data for Berlin
in 2008. Although these moments were not used in the gravity equation esti-
mation of ν = εκ above, we find that the model approximates the cumulative
distribution function in the data well. In Panel D of Figure 4, we undertake the
same exercise for West Berlin in 1986. Although the smaller geographic area
of West Berlin ensures that it has a quite different distribution of workplace
employment, residence employment, and travel times from Berlin as a whole,
we again find that the model approximates the relationship in the data. Finally,
in Panel E of Figure 4, we repeat the exercise for Berlin in 1936. Although the
distribution of travel times for Berlin differs between 1936 (based on public
transport) and 2006 (based on public transport and private automobiles), we
again find that the model has explanatory power for the data.49
   Therefore, despite our model necessarily being an abstraction, we find that
it is successful in capturing the key features of commuting patterns in Berlin
during our sample period, and successfully predicts moments not used in the
estimation of the commuting parameters.


                             6.2. Productivity and Amenities
   We now use the gravity equation estimation to recover overall adjusted pro-
ductivity, amenities, and the density of development {Ãit  B̃it  ϕ̃i }. We use the
model to recover these objects without taking a stand of the relative impor-
tance of externalities and fundamentals. From profit maximization and zero
profits (12), log adjusted final goods productivity relative to its geometric mean
is
                                         
               Ãit                Qit  α    ωit
(27)       ln         = (1 − α) ln     + ln      
               Ãt                 Qt   ε    ωt


where a bar above a variable again denotes a geometric mean, so that Ãt =
         S
exp{ S1 s=1 ln Ãst }. Intuitively, high floor prices and wages in (27) require high
final goods productivity in order for zero profits to be satisfied.


  49
     Consistent with the results in Duranton and Turner (2011) for U.S. metropolitan areas, we
find that the majority of commuters in Berlin have travel times of less than forty-five minutes in
all three years of our sample.
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                      2167

  From the residential choice probabilities (5) and population mobility with
the larger economy (9), log residential amenities relative to their geometric
mean are
                                                         
             B̃it  1      HRit                Qit     1     Wit
(28)     ln       = ln           + (1 − β) ln      − ln          
             B̃t   ε      H Rt                 Qt     ε     Wt

where Wit is a measure of commuting market access that can be written in terms
of the transformed wages (ωit ) from the commuting market clearing condition
(26):

                 
                 S

(29)     Wit =         ωst /eντist    ωst = w̃stε = Est wstε 
                 s=1


Intuitively, high residence employment and high floor prices in (28) must be
explained either by high commuting market access or by attractive residential
amenities. Using residential land market clearing (17) and commercial land
market clearing (18), we can also recover the adjusted density of development
relative to its geometric mean.
   To solve for adjusted productivity, amenities, and the density of develop-
ment, we require values for a subset of the model’s parameters: {α β μ ε κ}.
Of these parameters, the share of residential floor space in consumer expen-
diture (1 − β), the share of commercial floor space in firm costs (1 − α), and
the share of land in construction costs (1 − μ) are hard to determine from our
data, because information on consumer expenditures and factor payments at
the block level is not available over our long historical sample period. As there
is a degree of consensus about the values of these parameters, we set them
equal to central estimates from the existing empirical literature. We set the
share of consumer expenditure on residential floor space (1 − β) equal to 0.25,
which is consistent with the estimates in Davis and Ortalo-Magné (2011). We
assume that the share of firm expenditure on commercial floor space (1 − α)
is 0.20, which is in line with the findings of Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008).
We set the share of land in construction costs (1 − μ) equal to 0.25, which
is consistent with the values in Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2014) and
Epple, Gordon, and Sieg (2010) and with micro data on property transactions
that is available for Berlin from 2000 to 2012, as discussed in the Supplemental
Material.
   We use our estimate of ν = εκ = 007 from the gravity equation estimation
above. To calibrate the value of the Fréchet shape parameter (ε), we use our
data on the dispersion of log wages by workplace across the districts of West
Berlin for 1986. From the labor market clearing condition (26), transformed
wages (ωit ) are determined independently of ε from workplace employment,
residence employment, and travel times. Therefore, ε merely determines the
monotonic transformation that maps transformed wages (ωit ) into adjusted
2168                  AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

wages (w̃it = ω1/ε
                 it ). Hence ε merely scales the dispersion of log adjusted wages
relative to the dispersion of log transformed wages: σln2 w̃it = (1/ε)2 σln2 ωit . We
choose ε to minimize the squared difference between the variances across dis-
tricts of log adjusted wages in the model and log wages in the data, which yields
a value of ε = 683.50 This value of ε = 683 for commuting decisions is broadly
in line with the range of estimates for the Fréchet shape parameter for interna-
tional trade flows (the range of estimates in Eaton and Kortum (2002) is from
3.60 to 12.86 with a preferred value of 8.28).
   From ν = εκ = 007 and ε = 683, we obtain κ = 001. Using these assumed
parameter values, we solve for adjusted productivity (Ãit ) from (27) and ad-
justed amenities (B̃it ) from (28). We treat these solutions of the model as data
and examine the changes in productivity and amenities underlying the impact
of division and reunification in our reduced-form “difference-in-difference”
specification (22). In Column (1) of Table IV, we estimate our baseline speci-
fication for the impact of division for adjusted productivity (Ãi ) including our
six grid cells for distance to the pre-war CBD. We find substantial and statisti-
cally significant negative treatment effects of division. For example, for the first
distance grid cell, we estimate a reduction in productivity of −0207 log points.
In Column (2), we estimate the same specification for adjusted amenities (B̃i ).
Again we find substantial and statistically significant negative treatment effects
of division. For example, for the first distance grid cell, we estimate a reduction
in amenities of −0347 log points. Columns (3) and (4) demonstrate a similar
pattern of results for reunification, although the estimated effects are smaller
and more localized. These results provide a first piece of evidence that a model
in which productivity and amenities are exogenous and unaffected by division
and reunification is inconsistent with the data.

          6.3. Counterfactuals With Exogenous Location Characteristics
   To provide further evidence on the ability of a model with exogenous produc-
tivity, amenities, and the density of development to explain the data, we now
undertake counterfactuals for the effects of division and reunification for this
special case of the model. Even in the absence of production and residential
externalities, the model predicts treatment effects from division, because res-
idents in West Berlin lose access to employment opportunities in East Berlin,
and firms in West Berlin lose access to commuters from East Berlin. In re-
sponse to this shock, workers and residents reallocate across locations, and
land is reallocated between commercial and residential use, until wages and
floor prices adjust to satisfy zero profits and population mobility. As shown

    50
       Wages across West Berlin districts in 1986 differ by a maximum value of 26 percent, which
is in line with the maximum difference in mean residual wages (after controlling for worker ob-
servables) across areas of Boston and Minneapolis of 15 and 18 percent reported in Timothy and
Wheaton (2001).
                                    THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                                 2169
                                                   TABLE IV
               PRODUCTIVITY, AMENITIES, AND COUNTERFACTUAL FLOOR PRICESa

                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                  ln A          ln B          ln A          ln B        ln QC         ln QC
                               1936–1986      1936–1986      1986–2006      1986–2006     1936–1986      1986–2006

CBD 1                        −0207∗∗∗      −0347∗∗∗        0261∗∗∗      0203∗∗∗      −0408∗∗∗      −0010
                             (0049)        (0070)         (0073)       (0054)        (0038)        (0020)
CBD 2                        −0260∗∗∗      −0242∗∗∗        0144∗∗       0109∗        −0348∗∗∗       0079∗∗
                             (0032)        (0053)         (0056)       (0058)        (0017)        (0036)
CBD 3                        −0138∗∗∗      −0262∗∗∗        0077∗∗∗      0059∗∗       −0353∗∗∗       0036
                             (0021)        (0037)         (0024)       (0026)        (0022)        (0031)
CBD 4                        −0131∗∗∗      −0154∗∗∗        0057∗∗∗      0010         −0378∗∗∗       0093∗∗∗
                             (0016)        (0023)         (0015)       (0008)        (0021)        (0026)
CBD 5                        −0095∗∗∗      −0126∗∗∗        0028∗∗      −0014∗        −0380∗∗∗       0115∗∗∗
                             (0014)        (0013)         (0013)       (0007)        (0022)        (0033)
CBD 6                        −0061∗∗∗      −0117∗∗∗        0023∗∗       0001         −0354∗∗∗       0066∗∗∗
                             (0015)        (0015)         (0010)       (0005)        (0018)        (0023)
Counterfactuals                                                                               Yes            Yes
Agglomeration Effects                                                                         No             No
Observations                     2,844          5,978          5,602          6,718          6,260         7,050
R2                               0.09            0.06          0.02           0.03           0.07          0.03
    a Columns (1)–(4) based on calibrating the model for ν = εκ = 007 and ε = 683 from the gravity equation esti-
mation. Columns (5)–(6) report counterfactuals for these parameter values. A denotes adjusted overall productivity.
B denotes adjusted overall amenities. QC denotes counterfactual floor prices (simulating the effect of division on
West Berlin). Column (5) simulates division holding A and B constant at their 1936 values. Column (6) simulates
reunification holding A and B for West Berlin constant at their 1986 values and using 2006 values of A and B for
East Berlin. CBD1–CBD6 are six 500 m distance grid cells for distance from the pre-war CBD. Heteroscedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent (HAC) standard errors in parentheses (Conley (1999)). ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant
at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.



in Proposition 1, the model has a unique equilibrium with exogenous location
characteristics, and hence these counterfactuals yield determinate predictions.
   In our first counterfactual, we simulate the impact of division on West
Berlin, holding productivity, amenities, and the density of development con-
stant at their 1936 values. In Column (5) of Table IV, we reestimate our base-
line “difference-in-difference” specification using the counterfactual changes
in floor prices predicted by the model with exogenous location characteristics
instead of the actual changes in floor prices. We find that the counterfactual
treatment effect of division is negative and statistically significant, but substan-
tially smaller than the actual treatment effect of division (−0408 log points as
compared to −0800 log points for the first distance grid cell in Column (1) of
Table I).
   In our second counterfactual, we simulate the impact of reunification on
West Berlin, holding productivity, amenities, and the density of development
constant at their 1986 values in West Berlin, and using the 2006 values of these
2170                AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

location characteristics for East Berlin. In Column (6) of Table IV, we rees-
timate our baseline “difference-in-difference” specification for the impact of
reunification using the counterfactual changes in floor prices. We again find
that the counterfactual treatment effect is smaller than the actual treatment ef-
fect and is now sometimes statistically insignificant (close to zero as compared
to 0.398 log points for the first distance grid cell in Column (1) of Table II).
Therefore, the results of these counterfactuals provide further evidence that
a model in which productivity and amenities are exogenous and unaffected by
division and reunification is unable to explain the data.


                          7. STRUCTURAL ESTIMATION
  In the previous section, we used the model’s gravity equation predictions
to determine the commuting parameters {ν ε} without taking a stand on
the agglomeration parameters {λ δ η ρ}. In this section, we use the exoge-
nous variation from Berlin’s division and reunification to structurally esti-
mate the model’s parameters for both agglomeration and dispersion forces
{ν ε λ δ η ρ}, where ν = εκ. This enables us to decompose overall adjusted
productivity and amenities {Ãi  B̃i } into their two components of externalities
{Υi  Ωi } and adjusted fundamentals {ãi  b̃i }. We continue to assume the same
central values for the share of floor space in consumer expenditure (1 − β), the
share of floor space in firm costs (1 − α), and the share of land in construction
costs (1 − μ) as in Section 6.2 above.
  First, we use the results from Proposition 2 to show that adjusted production
and residential fundamentals {ãit  b̃it } are structural residuals of the model that
are one-to-one functions of the observed data and parameters. Second, we de-
velop moment conditions in terms of these structural residuals that use the
exogenous variation induced by Berlin’s division and reunification. Third, we
discuss the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimation. Fourth, we
show that the moment conditions uniquely identify the estimated parameters
{ν ε λ δ η ρ}. Fifth, we report the GMM estimation results. Sixth, we com-
pare our results to findings from the existing literature. Seventh, we report
additional over-identification checks on the model’s predictions. Finally, we
use the model to undertake counterfactuals in the presence of the estimated
production and residential externalities.


                             7.1. Structural Residuals
   In this section, we use Proposition 2 to obtain closed-form solutions for ad-
justed production and residential fundamentals in terms of the observed data
and parameters. From profit maximization and zero profits (12) and productiv-
ity (20), the proportional change in adjusted production fundamentals in each
                         THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                            2171

block relative to the geometric mean can be written as the following function
of observed data and parameters:
                                                          
                ãit               Qit    α       ωit            Υit
(30)       ln       = (1 − α) ln     +  ln          − λ ln       
                ãt                Qt     ε       ωt             Υt

where production externalities {Υit } depend on the travel-time weighted sum
of observed workplace employment densities (from (20)); ωit can be solved
from observed workplace employment and residence employment from labor
market clearing (26); and a bar above a variable denotes a geometric mean
                        S
such that ãt = exp{ S1 s=1 ln ãit }.
  From population mobility and utility maximization (5) and amenities (21),
the proportional change in adjusted residential fundamentals in each block
relative to the geometric mean can be written as the following function of ob-
served data and parameters:
                                            
              b̃it  1      HRit                   Qit
(31)      ln      =  ln         + (1 − β) ln
              b̃t   ε      H Rt                   Qt
                                              
                      1      Wit             Ωit
                    −  ln          − η ln       
                      ε      Wt              Ωt

where residential externalities {Ωit } depend on the travel-time weighted sum
of observed residence employment densities (from (21)); commuting market
access {Wit } can be solved from observed workplace employment and residence
employment (see (26) and (29)); and a bar above a variable again denotes a
geometric mean.
   The structural residuals in (30) and (31) difference out any time-invariant
factors with time-invariant effects, because of the differencing before and af-
ter division (as denoted by the time-difference operator ). These structural
residuals also difference out any common fixed effect across all blocks in each
year (e.g., changes in the reservation level of utility Ūt or the choice of units
in which to measure production and residential fundamentals), because we di-
vide by the geometric mean of each variable in each year before taking logs.
Therefore, the mean changes in log adjusted production and residential fun-
damentals in (30) and (31) are necessarily equal to zero.


                            7.2. Moment Conditions
   Our first set of moment conditions impose that the changes in adjusted pro-
duction and residential fundamentals in (30) and (31) are uncorrelated with
the exogenous change in the surrounding concentration of economic activ-
ity induced by Berlin’s division and reunification. Based on the results of our
2172                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

reduced-form regressions, we capture this exogenous change in the surround-
ing concentration of economic activity using distance grid cells from the pre-
war CBD. Therefore, our first set of moment conditions are:

(32)       E Ik ×  ln(ãit /ãt ) = 0      k ∈ {1     KI }

(33)       E Ik ×  ln(b̃it /b̃t ) = 0      k ∈ {1     KI }

where Ik for k ∈ {1     KI } are indicator variables for distance grid cell k from
the pre-war CBD. We use 50 indicator variables based on percentiles of dis-
tance to the pre-war CBD. Therefore, the moment conditions (32) and (33)
impose that the mean change in log adjusted production and residential fun-
damentals is zero for each of the distance grid cells.
   This identifying assumption requires that the systematic change in the gradi-
ent of economic activity in West Berlin relative to the pre-war CBD following
division is explained by the mechanisms of the model (the changes in com-
muting access and production and residential externalities) rather than by sys-
tematic changes in the pattern of structural residuals (adjusted production and
residential fundamentals).51 Since Berlin’s division stemmed from military con-
siderations during the Second World War and its reunification originated in the
wider collapse of Communism, the resulting changes in the surrounding con-
centration of economic activity are plausibly exogenous to changes in adjusted
production and residential fundamentals in West Berlin blocks.
   In addition to the above moment conditions for adjusted production and
residential fundamentals, we use two other moment conditions for division
and reunification based on commuting travel times and wage dispersion for
West Berlin during division.52 The first of these moment conditions requires
that the total number of workers commuting for less than 30 minutes in the
model is equal to the corresponding number in the data. From the commuting
market clearing condition (26), this moment condition can be expressed as the
following expectation:
                                               
                         S
                                ωj /eντij
(34)      E ψHMj −                           HRi = 0
                        i∈ℵj
                              S
                                        ντis
                                   ωs /e
                               s=1


   51
      We do not use moment conditions in the adjusted density of development (ϕ̃i ) in our estima-
tion, because the density of development could, in principle, respond to changes in the relative
demand for floor space across locations within West Berlin as a result of the mechanisms in the
model (the changes in commuting access and production and residential externalities).
   52
      In Section 6.1, we reported over-identification checks in which we showed that the model us-
ing an estimated value of ν = εκ for one year is successful in capturing the pattern of commuting
flows in other years of the data, suggesting that the commuting parameters are stable over our
sample period.
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                 2173

where ψ in the first term inside the brackets is the fraction of workers that com-
mute for less than 30 minutes in the data; ωj = w̃jε ; ℵj is the set of residence
locations i within 30 minutes travel time of workplace location j; hence the sec-
ond term inside the brackets captures the model’s predictions for commuting
flows with travel times less than 30 minutes.
   The second of these moment conditions requires that the variance of log
adjusted wages in the model (var(w̃i )) is equal to the variance of log wages in
the data (σln2 wi ) for West Berlin during division:53

(35)       E (1/ε)2 ln(ωj )2 − σln2 wi = 0

where transformed wages (ωi = w̃iε ) depend solely on ν, workplace employ-
ment, residence employment, and travel times from the labor market clearing
condition (26). The parameter ε scales the variance of log adjusted wages (w̃i )
relative to the variance of log transformed wages (ωi ).

                                 7.3. GMM Estimation
  We use the above moment conditions and the Generalized Method of Mo-
ments (GMM) to estimate the model’s full set of parameters for agglomeration
and dispersion forces Λ = {ν ε λ δ η ρ}. Stacking our moment conditions
together, we obtain

                      1 
                          N

(36)       M(Λ) =           m(Xi  Λ) = 0
                      N i=1

where m(Xi  Λ) is the moment function for observation i.
   We estimate the model separately for the difference between the pre-war
and division periods and for the difference between the division and reunifica-
tion periods. The efficient GMM estimator solves

                                1                1 
                                     N                         N

(37)       Λ̂GMM = arg min            m(Xi  Λ) W       m(Xi  Λ) 
                                N i=1             N i=1

where W is the efficient weighting matrix. As in our reduced-form estimation,
we report Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent (HAC) standard
errors that allow for spatial correlation in the errors following Conley (1999).
  This minimization problem involves evaluating the moment conditions (36)
for each parameter vector and searching over alternative parameter vec-
tors (Λ). We briefly discuss here the algorithms that we use to solve these

  53
     As reliable wage data for pre-war Berlin are unavailable, we use wages by workplace for
West Berlin during division in our moment conditions, which is consistent with our use of the
commuting data above.
2174                AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

problems and include a more detailed discussion in the Supplemental Mate-
rial. First, evaluating the moment conditions for each parameter vector in-
volves solving a fixed point problem for the vector of transformed wages that
solves the labor market clearing condition (26). In the Supplemental Material,
we show analytically that transformed wages are gross substitutes in the labor
market clearing condition and that this system of equations has a unique so-
lution (see Lemmas S.6 and S.7). Therefore, we solve for transformed wages
using an iterative fixed point procedure that converges rapidly to this unique
solution. Second, this iterative fixed point problem is nested within an opti-
mization routine over the parameter vector (Λ). We use standard optimization
algorithms to search over alternative possible values for the parameter vector.

                                7.4. Identification
   In Proposition 2, we show that we can use the equilibrium conditions of
the model to exactly identify adjusted production and residential fundamen-
tals {ãi  b̃i } from the observed data {Q HM  HR  K τ} and known values of the
model’s parameters {ν ε λ δ η ρ}. Therefore, adjusted production and resi-
dential fundamentals are structural residuals that are one-to-one functions of
the observed data and parameters, as demonstrated in Section 7.1. We now
show how our moment conditions in terms of these structural residuals can be
used to identify the model’s parameters (and hence recover both the unknown
parameters and unobserved adjusted fundamentals).
   An important feature of our GMM estimation is that we have closed-form
solutions for the structural residuals of adjusted production and residential
fundamentals in terms of the observed data and parameters. Therefore, when
we consider alternative parameter vectors, we always condition on the same
observed endogenous variables, and use Proposition 2 to solve for the implied
values of adjusted production and residential fundamentals. In contrast, in sim-
ulation methods such as Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) or indirect
inference, these closed-form solutions are typically not available. Hence these
simulation methods are required to solve for alternative values of the endoge-
nous variables for each parameter vector.
   We identify the model’s parameters using the moment conditions from Sec-
tion 7.2. In principle, these moment conditions need not uniquely identify
the model’s parameters, because the objective function defined by them may
not be globally concave. For example, the objective function could be flat in
the parameter space or there could be multiple local minima correspond-
ing to different combinations of the parameters {ν ε λ δ η ρ} and unob-
served fundamentals {ã b̃} that are consistent with the same observed data
{Q HM  HR  K τ}. However, in practice, we find that the objective function is
well behaved in the parameter space, and that our moment conditions deter-
mine a unique parameter vector. In Section S.4.5 of the Supplemental Mate-
rial, we report the results of a grid search over the parameter space, in which
                         THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                            2175

we show that the GMM objective has a unique global minimum that identifies
the parameters. In Section A.3 of the Technical Data Appendix, we report the
results of a Monte Carlo simulation, in which we generate data for a hypo-
thetical city using known parameters, and show that our estimation approach
recovers the correct values of these known parameters.
   We now consider each of the moment conditions in turn and show how they
identify the parameters {ν ε λ δ η ρ}. We begin with the semi-elasticity of
commuting flows with respect to travel times (ν). A higher value of ν implies
that commuting flows decline more rapidly with travel times, which implies that
a larger fraction of workers commute for less than thirty minutes in the com-
muting moment condition (34). The recursive structure of the model implies
that none of the other parameters {ε λ δ η ρ} affect the commuting moment
condition (ε only enters through ν = εκ and ωj ).
   We next consider the Fréchet shape parameter determining the heterogene-
ity of workers’ commuting decisions (ε). A higher value of ε implies a smaller
dispersion in adjusted wages (w̃it ) in the wage moment condition (35) given
the dispersion in transformed wages (ωit ) determined by the commuting pa-
rameter ν and the commuting market clearing condition (26). The recursive
structure of the model implies that none of the other parameters {λ δ η ρ}
affect the wage moment condition.
   We now turn to the parameters for production spillovers {λ δ} and residen-
tial spillovers {η ρ}. Although the division of Berlin provides a single shock,
we can separately identify these two sets of spillover parameters. The reason
is that adjusted productivity and amenities {Ãi  B̃i } can be separately recov-
ered from the observed data using the equilibrium conditions of the model
(see (27) and (28)). Given these separate measures of productivity and ameni-
ties, the productivity spillover parameters {λ δ} could be estimated from a
regression of changes in productivity (Ãi ) on changes in production externali-
ties (Υi ), instrumenting changes in production externalities with indicator vari-
ables for distance grid cells from the pre-war CBD. Similarly, the residential
spillover parameters {η ρ} could be estimated from a regression of changes
in amenities (B̃i ) on changes in residential externalities (Ωi ), instrumenting
changes in residential externalities with indicator variables for distance grid
cells from the pre-war CBD. The exclusion restrictions are that: (i) workplace
employment affects adjusted productivity, but not adjusted amenities, (ii) resi-
dence employment affects adjusted amenities, but not adjusted productivities.
Assumption (i) is the standard specification of production externalities in ur-
ban economics and assumption (ii) models residential externalities symmetri-
cally to production externalities, as discussed in Section 3.5. From the moment
conditions for changes in production and residential fundamentals (32)–(33),
our GMM estimator is similar to these instrumental variable regressions, but
jointly estimates the parameters {ν ε λ δ η ρ} as part of a system that in-
cludes our moment conditions for commuting and wages.
2176                AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

   In Section S.4.5 of the Supplemental Material, we show how changes in the
spillover parameters {λ δ η ρ} affect our moment conditions for adjusted
production and residential fundamentals. The division of Berlin implies a fall
in production externalities (Υi ) for the parts of West Berlin close to the Berlin
Wall. If this fall in production externalities does not fully explain the changes
in adjusted productivity (Ãit ) close to the Berlin Wall, the remainder will be
explained by a change in adjusted production fundamentals (ãit ). The parame-
ters {λ δ} control the magnitude of the fall in production externalities and its
rate of decay with travel time to Eastern concentrations of workplace employ-
ment. From the moment condition (32), the production spillover parameters
{λ δ} are chosen to make the mean changes in log adjusted production funda-
mentals (30) as flat as possible across the distance grid cells from the pre-war
CBD.
   Similarly, the division of Berlin implies a fall in residential externalities (Ωi )
for the parts of West Berlin close to the Berlin Wall. If this fall in residential
externalities does not fully explain the changes in adjusted amenities (B̃i ) close
to the Berlin Wall, the remainder will be explained by a change in adjusted
residential fundamentals (b̃i ). The parameters {η ρ} control the magnitude
of the fall in residential externalities and its rate of decay with travel time to
Eastern concentrations of residence employment. From the moment condition
(33), the residential spillover parameters {η ρ} are chosen to make the mean
changes in log adjusted residential fundamentals (31) as flat as possible across
the distance grid cells from the pre-war CBD.

                          7.5. GMM Estimation Results
   In Table V, we report efficient GMM estimation results for the division and
reunification experiments, both separately and pooling the two experiments. In
Column (1), we report the results for division. We find substantial and statisti-
cally significant agglomeration forces, with an estimated elasticity of productiv-
ity with respect to the surrounding concentration of workplace employment of
λ = 008, and an estimated elasticity of amenities with respect to the surround-
ing concentration of residence employment of η = 015. Both production and
residential externalities are highly localized, with exponential rates of decay of
δ = 036 and ρ = 091, respectively. We find similar commuting parameters as
in our earlier estimation based on the gravity equation, with a semi-elasticity
of commuting flows with respect to travel time of ν = εκ = 010 compared to
ν = 007. Together, our estimates of ν and ε imply a spatial decay parameter
for commuting costs of κ = ν/ε = 001.
   In Column (2) of Table V, we report the efficient GMM estimation re-
sults for reunification. We find a broadly similar pattern of results, although
the estimates are smaller and less precisely estimated than for division. We
find an elasticity of productivity with respect to production externalities of
λ = 005 and an elasticity of amenities with respect to residential externalities
                                   THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                                2177
                                                  TABLE V
              GENERALIZED METHOD OF MOMENTS (GMM) ESTIMATION RESULTSa

                                                                                                         (3)
                                                             (1)                   (2)              Division and
                                                          Division            Reunification         Reunification
                                                          Efficient             Efficient             Efficient
                                                           GMM                   GMM                   GMM

Commuting Travel Time Elasticity (κε)                    00951∗∗∗             01011∗∗∗             00987∗∗∗
                                                        (00016)              (00016)              (00016)
Commuting Heterogeneity (ε)                              66190∗∗∗             67620∗∗∗             66941∗∗∗
                                                        (00939)              (01005)              (00934)
Productivity Elasticity (λ)                              00793∗∗∗             00496∗∗∗             00710∗∗∗
                                                        (00064)              (00079)              (00054)
Productivity Decay (δ)                                   03585∗∗∗             09246∗∗∗             03617∗∗∗
                                                        (01030)              (03525)              (00782)
Residential Elasticity (η)                               01548∗∗∗             00757∗∗              01553∗∗∗
                                                        (00092)              (00313)              (00083)
Residential Decay (ρ)                                    09094∗∗∗             05531                07595∗∗∗
                                                        (02968)              (03979)              (01741)
   a Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimates. Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent (HAC)
standard errors in parentheses (Conley (1999)). ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.



of η = 008, which are both significant at conventional levels. Production and
residential externalities are again highly localized with rates of spatial decay of
0.92 and 0.55, respectively (although the spatial decay of residential externali-
ties is not significant at conventional levels). Our estimates of both commuting
parameters are again similar to our earlier estimates based on the gravity equa-
tion.
   In Column (3) of Table V, we report the efficient GMM results pooling the
division and reunification experiments, which exploits both sources of variation
in the data. To illustrate the magnitude of the spatial decays implied by our
parameter estimates, Columns (1) and (2) of Table VI report the proportional
reductions in production and residential externalities with travel time, using
the pooled efficient GMM parameter estimates. After around 10 minutes of
travel time, both production and residential externalities fall to close to zero.
Given our estimated travel speeds for each mode of transport, 10 minutes of
travel time corresponds to around 0.83 kilometers by foot (at an average speed
of 5 kilometers per hour) and about 4 kilometers by U-Bahn or S-Bahn (at an
average speed of 25 kilometers per hour).
   In Column (3) of Table VI, we report the proportional increase in commut-
ing costs with travel time, again using the pooled efficient GMM parameter
estimates. Commuting costs are much less responsive to travel times than pro-
duction or residential externalities. Nonetheless, consistent with the rapid ob-
served decline in commuting with travel time, the implied commuting costs are
2178                  AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

                                               TABLE VI
                           EXTERNALITIES AND COMMUTING COSTSa

                                         (1)                    (2)                     (3)
                                    Production             Residential             Utility After
                                    Externalities          Externalities           Commuting
                                     (1 × e−δτ )            (1 × e−ρτ )            (1 × e−κτ )

             0 minutes                 1000                   1000                  1000
             1 minute                  0696                   0468                  0985
             2 minutes                 0485                   0219                  0971
             3 minutes                 0338                   0102                  0957
             5 minutes                 0164                   0022                  0929
             7 minutes                 0079                   0005                  0902
             10 minutes                0027                   0001                  0863
             15 minutes                0004                   0000                  0802
             20 minutes                0001                   0000                  0745
             30 minutes                0000                   0000                  0642
                a Proportional reduction in production and residential externalities with travel
             time and proportional reduction in utility from commuting with travel time.
             Travel time is measured in minutes. Results are based on the pooled efficient
             GMM parameter estimates: δ = 03617, ρ = 07595, κ = 00148.



still substantial. Other things equal, after around 10 minutes of travel time, util-
ity falls by 14 percentage points ((1 − 086) × 100). In interpreting this result,
one has to take into account that workers self-select across bilateral commutes.
Intuitively, workers will only choose to take an extremely long bilateral com-
mute if they have a high draw for the idiosyncratic utility derived from that
pair of workplace and residence locations. More formally, an implication of
the Fréchet distribution for idiosyncratic utility is that average utility condi-
tional on choosing a bilateral commute is the same for all bilateral commutes,
as shown in Section S.2.3 in the Supplemental Material.
   To the extent that the spillover parameters {λ η δ ρ} are deep structural
parameters, we would expect the estimates to be the same for division and re-
unification. On the one hand, production technologies, industry composition,
and the nature of urban amenities could have changed between the division
and reunification periods, in such a way as to affect both the magnitude {λ η}
and localization {δ ρ} of production and residential externalities. On the other
hand, as shown in the reduced-form regressions and in Figure 3, reunification
is a smaller shock than division, which provides less variation to identify the pa-
rameters, as reflected in the larger standard errors on the spillover parameters
for reunification than for division. Therefore, to exploit all of the variation in
the data, we focus in what follows on the parameter estimates pooling both di-
vision and reunification. Although our model (like any model) is necessarily an
abstraction, we show below in Section 7.8 that our pooled parameter estimates
generate counterfactual treatment effects for both division and reunification
that provide a good approximation to the observed data.
                               THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                        2179

      7.6. Comparison With Existing Estimates of Agglomeration Economies
   Our central estimate of the elasticity of productivity with respect to pro-
duction externalities (λ = 007 from Column (3) of Table V) is towards the
high end of the 3–8 percent range stated in the survey by Rosenthal and
Strange (2004), but less than the elasticities from some quasi-experimental
studies (see, e.g., Kline and Moretti (2014) and Greenstone, Hornbeck, and
Moretti (2010)).54 In comparing our results to the existing literature, a num-
ber of points must be taken into account. First, the zero-profit condition (12)
links overall productivity to wages and floor prices. Therefore, lower estimates
of agglomeration economies using data on wages, for example, could reflect
that higher productivity leads to both higher wages and higher floor prices.55
Second, our estimate of λ = 007 captures the effect of doubling workplace
employment density holding constant travel times. In reality, a doubling in to-
tal city population is typically achieved by a combination of an increase in the
density of workplace employment and an expansion in geographical land area,
with the accompanying increase in average travel times within the city. There-
fore, the elasticity of productivity with respect to such a doubling of total city
population is less than λ = 007, because an increase in average travel times
reduces production externalities at a rate determined by the spatial decay pa-
rameter δ.56
   Our findings of substantial and highly localized production externalities are
also consistent with recent research using within-city data. Using data on the
location of advertising agencies in Manhattan, Arzaghi and Henderson (2008)
found little evidence of knowledge spillovers beyond 500 meters straight-line
distance. To compare straight-line distances to travel times, we computed the
mean travel time in 2006 across all bilateral connections in our data that cover
a straight-line distance between 450 and 550 meters, which is approximately

   54
      In a recent meta-analysis of estimates of urban agglomeration economies, Melo, Graham,
and Noland (2009) reported a mean estimate of 0.058 across 729 estimates from 34 studies, con-
sistent with Rosenthal and Strange (2004).
   55
      To further explore this point, we estimate elasticities of floor prices, wages, and productivity
with respect to distance from the pre-war CBD in 2006, which are −0196, −0130, and −0143,
respectively. Therefore, some of the higher productivity close to the CBD is reflected in higher
floor prices as well as in higher wages. The wage and productivity elasticities weighted by their
coefficients in zero-profits (12) add up to the floor price elasticity (up to rounding): −((08/02) ×
−0130) + ((1/02) × −0143) = −0195.
   56
      To illustrate the quantitative relevance of this point, we have used the model to estimate the
median impact on the productivity of a West Berlin block within 3.75 kilometers of the pre-war
CBD from production externalities from East Berlin in 1936, which corresponds to 00121 log
points. In contrast, if one could distribute the workplace employment of East Berlin proportion-
ately to each West Berlin block, this would increase workplace employment in each West Berlin
block by a factor of 1.7556, and hence from (20) would increase the productivity of each West
Berlin block by 00710 × ln(17556) = 00400 log points.
2180                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

9 minutes.57 After 9 minutes of travel time, our estimates suggest produc-
tion externalities have declined to around 4 percent. Our estimates of pos-
itive residential externalities are in line with the idea that urban amenities
are endogenous to the surrounding concentration of economic activity, as in
Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz (2001) and Diamond (2013). Our findings of large
and highly localized residential externalities are consistent with other evidence
on spillovers in residential choices. Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and Owens (2010)
used data on urban revitalization programs in Richmond, Virginia, and found
that each dollar of home improvement spending generated between $2 and $6
in land value by way of externalities in the targeted neighborhoods, but housing
externalities fall by approximately one half every 1,000 feet.

                              7.7. Over-Identification Checks
   In addition to the over-identification checks using commuting data discussed
above, we now examine the model’s predictions for other variables not used in
the estimation. We begin with the ratio of floor space to land area. In our struc-
tural estimation, we use the equilibrium relationships of the model to solve for
the adjusted density of development (ϕ̃i ) that equates the demand for floor
space to the supply of floor space. The resulting measure of the ratio of ad-
justed floor space to land area (L̃i /Ki = ϕ̃i Ki−μ ) is implicitly quality adjusted
and captures other variables besides ϕi that enter the model isomorphically
through ϕ̃i . In contrast, our measure of the ratio of floor space to land area
in the data is coarse, because it is based on a number of discrete categories
(e.g., greater than 4.5), and it does not control for the quality of floor space.
Nonetheless, as reported in Table A.15 of the Technical Data Appendix, we
find a strong, statistically significant, and approximately log-linear relationship
between the two variables. For example, the estimated coefficient in 2006 is
close to 1 (0.959 with Conley standard error 0.018), with an R2 of 0.36. Given
the caveats noted above, and the fact that this is a univariate regression using
cross-sectional micro data, the strength of this empirical relationship provides
further support for the model’s predictions.
   As an additional external validity check, we examine whether our estimates
of adjusted production and residential fundamentals {ãi  b̃i } in 2006 are corre-
lated with observable block characteristics that plausibly affect their suitability
for production or residence. As reported in Table A.16 of the Technical Data
Appendix, we find that adjusted residential fundamentals are positively corre-
lated with green areas, proximity to water, and listed buildings, and negatively
correlated with noise and the level of destruction in the Second World War.
In contrast, adjusted production fundamentals are uncorrelated with the level

   57
      The standard deviation of travel times in the 450 to 550 meter straight-line distance bin is
3.4 minutes, which illustrates that straight-line distances are an imperfect proxy for actual travel
times in cities, particularly over shorter distances.
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                      2181

of noise, are less negatively correlated with the level of war-time destruction,
and are positively correlated with the other observable block characteristics.
Therefore, our estimates of adjusted production and residential fundamentals
are related in the expected way to separate data on observable correlates for
these variables.


         7.8. Counterfactuals With Endogenous Location Characteristics
   In Section 6.3, we reported counterfactuals for the special case of the model
with exogenous location characteristics. In this subsection, we undertake coun-
terfactuals for the model with agglomeration forces, in which productivity and
amenities depend on endogenous production and residential externalities. We
assume alternative values of location characteristics {ãi  b̃i  τij } or spillover pa-
rameters {λ δ η ρ} and solve for the model’s counterfactual equilibrium. We
first use these counterfactuals to provide further evidence on the model’s fit by
examining the extent to which the observed treatment effects of division and
reunification can be explained by the model’s agglomeration and dispersion
forces rather than by changes in location fundamentals. We next examine the
relative importance of production and residential externalities. Finally, we re-
port an out of sample counterfactual, in which we show that the model provides
a framework that can be used to examine the impact of a change in transport
technology.
   As discussed above, in the presence of agglomeration forces, there is the po-
tential for multiple equilibria in the model. We assume the equilibrium selec-
tion rule of solving for the closest counterfactual equilibrium to the observed
equilibrium prior to the counterfactual. In particular, we use the values of
the endogenous variables from the observed equilibrium as our initial guess
for the counterfactual equilibrium.58 Our goal in these counterfactuals is not
to determine the unique impact on economic activity, but rather to examine
whether the model with the estimated agglomeration parameters is capable of
generating counterfactual treatment effects for division and reunification close
to the observed treatment effects. In our structural estimation, the model ex-
actly replicates the observed data, because we solve for the values of the struc-
tural residuals for which the observed floor price and employment data are
an equilibrium of the model. In contrast, in these counterfactuals, the model’s
predictions need not necessarily replicate the observed data, because we as-
sume alternative (counterfactual) values of location characteristics or parame-
ters.

   58
      Using these initial values, we solve the model’s system of equations for a new value of the
endogenous variables. We then update our guess for the counterfactual equilibrium based on a
weighted average of these new values and the initial values. Finally, we repeat this process until
the new values and initial values converge.
2182                AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

   In our first counterfactual, we simulate division using our pooled parameter
estimates and holding location fundamentals {ãi  b̃i  ϕ̃i } constant at their 1936
values. We choose the reservation level of utility in the wider economy follow-
ing division to ensure that the total population of West Berlin (H) is equal to its
value in the data in 1986. We estimate our baseline “difference-in-difference”
specification (22) using the counterfactual change in floor prices following divi-
sion. As reported in Column (1) of Table VII, we find counterfactual treatment
effects of division close to the observed treatment effects (e.g., −0836 for the
first distance grid cell compared to −0800 in Column (1) of Table I). There-
fore, the estimated model with agglomeration forces can explain quantitatively
the observed impact of division, which suggests that our equilibrium selection
rule is selecting an equilibrium following division that is close to the observed
equilibrium.
   In Column (2), we set residential externalities to zero (η = 0). In Col-
umn (3), we set production externalities to zero (λ = 0). As apparent from
the table, both production and residential externalities make substantive con-
tributions to the overall impact of division. In Column (4), we halve the rates
of spatial decay of both production externalities and residential externalities
{δ ρ}. In this case, we find somewhat larger counterfactual treatment effects
for distance grid cells further from the pre-war CBD, consistent with the effect
of division extending further into West Berlin.
   In our next three counterfactuals, we simulate reunification, choosing the
reservation level of utility in the wider economy following reunification to en-
sure that the total population of Berlin (H) is equal to its value in the data in
2006. We again estimate our baseline “difference-in-difference” specification
(22) using the counterfactual change in floor prices. In Column (5), we use our
pooled parameter estimates, 1986 values of location fundamentals for West
Berlin, and 2006 values of location fundamentals for East Berlin. As shown in
the table, we find counterfactual treatment effects close to the observed treat-
ment effects (e.g., 0.363 for the first distance grid cell compared to 0.398 in
Column (1) of Table II). Therefore, consistent with our results for division,
the model with the estimated agglomeration forces can explain the observed
impact of reunification.
   In Column (6), we consider the same specification as in Column (5), but
use 1936 (instead of 2006) values of location fundamentals for East Berlin.
We now find counterfactual treatment effects substantially larger than the ob-
served treatment effects (e.g., 1.160 versus 0.398 for the first distance grid cell).
This pattern of results is consistent with the idea that a recovery of East Berlin
to the relative levels of economic development prior to the Second World War
would lead to a further reorientation of economic activity within West Berlin.
In Column (7), we consider the same specification as in Column (5), but use
our division (instead of pooled) parameter estimates. We find counterfactual
                                                                                  TABLE VII
                                                                            COUNTERFACTUALSa

                                          (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)                  (6)                   (7)
                                        ln QC               ln QC                ln QC               ln QC                ln QC               ln QC                ln QC
                                      1936–1986            1936–1986             1936–1986            1936–1986             1986–2006            1986–2006             1986–2006
CBD 1                               −0836∗∗∗            −0613∗∗∗             −0467∗∗∗             −0821∗∗∗              0363∗∗∗              1160∗∗∗             0392∗∗∗
                                    (0052)              (0032)               (0060)               (0051)               (0041)               (0052)              (0043)
CBD 2                               −0560∗∗∗            −0397∗∗∗             −0364∗∗∗             −0624∗∗∗              0239∗∗∗              0779∗∗∗             0244∗∗∗




                                                                                                                                                                                      THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY
                                    (0034)              (0025)               (0019)               (0029)               (0028)               (0044)              (0027)
CBD 3                               −0455∗∗∗            −0312∗∗∗             −0336∗∗∗             −0530∗∗∗              0163∗∗∗              0594∗∗∗             0179∗∗∗
                                    (0036)              (0030)               (0030)               (0036)               (0031)               (0045)              (0031)
CBD 4                               −0423∗∗∗            −0284∗∗∗             −0340∗∗∗             −0517∗∗∗              0140∗∗∗              0445∗∗∗             0143∗∗∗
                                    (0026)              (0019)               (0022)               (0031)               (0021)               (0042)              (0021)
CBD 5                               −0418∗∗∗            −0265∗∗∗             −0351∗∗∗             −0512∗∗∗              0177∗∗∗              0403∗∗∗             0180∗∗∗
                                    (0032)              (0022)               (0027)               (0039)               (0032)               (0038)              (0032)
CBD 6                               −0349∗∗∗            −0222∗∗∗             −0304∗∗∗             −0430∗∗∗              0100∗∗∗              0334∗∗∗             0103∗∗∗
                                    (0025)              (0016)               (0022)               (0029)               (0024)               (0034)              (0023)
Counterfactuals                          Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Agglomeration Effects                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Observations                            6,260                6,260                 6,260                6,260                 7,050                6,260                7,050
R2                                      0.11                 0.13                  0.07                 0.13                  0.12                 0.24                 0.13
    a Columns (1)–(6) are based on the parameter estimates pooling division and reunification from Table V. Column (7) is based on the parameter estimates for division from
Table V. QC denotes counterfactual floor prices. Column (1) simulates division using our estimates of production and residential externalities and 1936 fundamentals. Column
(2) simulates division using our estimates of production externalities and 1936 fundamentals but setting residential externalities to zero. Column (3) simulates division using our
estimates of residential externalities and 1936 fundamentals but setting production externalities to zero. Column (4) simulates division using our estimates of production and
residential externalities and 1936 fundamentals but halving their rates of spatial decay with travel time. Column (5) simulates reunification using our estimates of production
and residential externalities, 1986 fundamentals for West Berlin, and 2006 fundamentals for East Berlin. Column (6) simulates reunification using our estimates of production
and residential externalities, 1986 fundamentals for West Berlin and 1936 fundamentals for East Berlin. Column (7) simulates reunification using division rather than pooled
parameter estimates, 1986 fundamentals for West Berlin, and 2006 fundamentals for East Berlin. CBD 1–CBD6 are six 500 m distance grid cells for distance from the pre-war
CBD. Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent (HAC) standard errors in parentheses (Conley (1999)). ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
                                                                                                                                                                                      2183
2184                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

treatment effects for reunification close to those in Column (5), which is con-
sistent with the similarity of the division and pooled parameter estimates.59
   Although the focus of our analysis is on the division and reunification of
Berlin, our quantitative model provides a tractable platform for undertaking a
range of counterfactuals. As an illustration of the model’s potential, our final
counterfactual examines a change in transport technology. In particular, we ex-
amine the impact of the automobile on the location of economic activity within
Berlin. We use the model to solve for the counterfactual equilibrium distribu-
tion of economic activity in 2006 using travel time measures based solely on
the public transport network in 2006. To focus on the impact of the change
in transport technology in Berlin, we hold the reservation utility in the wider
economy constant.
   Our 2006 travel time measures using only public transport are typically
higher than our baseline 2006 measures that weight public transport and the
automobile by their modal shares. In comparison with American cities, the
public transport network is far more extensive in Berlin (on average, public
transport, including walking and cycling, accounts for around two thirds of
journeys in our 2006 data) and is relatively more important for commuting
into the central city. Table S.I of the Supplemental Material compares the ac-
tual and counterfactual travel times. As shown in rows 1–4 of the table, the un-
weighted average travel time across all possible bilateral connections with posi-
tive values of either workplace or residence employment rises from 51 minutes
to 70 minutes, and its standard deviation rises from 13 minutes to 26 minutes
(since remote locations with high actual travel times and poor public transport
connections are most affected). As implied by our gravity equation estimation
in Section 6.1, commuting flows are higher on average for shorter travel times.
Therefore, as shown in rows 5–6 of the table, if we weight travel times by the
actual bilateral commuting flows in the 2006 equilibrium, average travel times
rise from 32 minutes to 38 minutes.
   The commuting technology facilitates a separation of workplace and resi-
dence, enabling people to work in relatively high productivity locations (typi-
cally in more central locations) and live in high amenity locations (typically in
suburban locations). The deterioration of the commuting technology triggers
an outflow of workers from Berlin, until floor prices fall such that expected
utility in Berlin is again equal to the unchanged reservation level of utility in
the wider economy. Total city employment and output fall by around 14 and

  59
     While for brevity we concentrate on the model’s counterfactual predictions for the gradient
of economic activity with respect to pre-war CBD, we find that it is also successful in accounting
for other features of the observed data, such as the gradient of economic activity with respect
to the Kudamm. For example, regressing floor prices in West Berlin in 1986 and 2006 on grid
cells of 500 meter intervals for distance to the Kudamm (and including grid cells for distance to
the pre-war CBD as controls), we find similar gradients of economic activity with respect to the
Kudamm for counterfactual floor prices as for actual floor prices.
                         THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                            2185

12 percent, respectively (rows 7–8 of the table). Output falls by less than em-
ployment, because labor is only one of the two factors of production and the
total supply of floor space is held constant. On average, floor prices decline
by 20 percent (row 9 of the table). This decline in floor prices is substantially
larger for blocks experiencing above median increases in average unweighted
travel times (typically in remote locations) than for blocks experiencing below
median increases in these travel times (typically in more central locations), as
shown in rows 10–11 of the table.
   The general equilibrium response of the economy to the deterioration in
the commuting technology is that locations become less specialized in work-
place and residence activity, as shown in Figure S.7 of the Supplemental Mate-
rial. Panel A shows that blocks that are larger importers of commuters before
the change in transport technology (larger net commuting on the horizon-
tal axis) experience larger declines in workplace employment (on the vertical
axis). Panel B shows that blocks that are larger exporters of commuters before
the change in transport technology (smaller net commuting on the horizon-
tal axis) experience larger declines in residence employment (on the vertical
axis). A corollary of this decline in block specialization is a change in the pat-
tern of worker sorting across bilateral pairs of workplace and residence loca-
tions. Even though travel times for a typical bilateral pair have increased, we
find that this change in worker sorting results in average travel times weighted
by commuting flows in the counterfactual equilibrium (row 12 of Table S.I)
that marginally decline relative to average travel times weighted by commut-
ing flows in the actual equilibrium (row 5 of the table). Taken together, these
results highlight that the model provides a framework that can be used to an-
alyze the endogenous change in the organization of economic activity within
cities in response to changes in the transport network and other interventions
(such as planning regulations).

                               8. CONCLUSIONS
   In this paper, we develop a quantitative theoretical model of city structure
that incorporates agglomeration and dispersion forces, allows for asymmetries
in locational fundamentals, and remains tractable and amenable to empiri-
cal analysis. To separate out agglomeration and dispersion forces from hetero-
geneity in locational fundamentals, we combine the model with the exogenous
source of variation in the surrounding concentration of economic activity pro-
vided by Berlin’s division and reunification.
   The model implies a gravity equation for bilateral commuting flows, which is
successful in accounting for observed commuting patterns. We find substantial
differences in productivity and amenities across locations within cities that are
endogenous to the surrounding concentration of economic activity. While our
estimates of the elasticity of productivity with respect to density using within-
city data are somewhat higher than those using across-city data, we highlight
2186                  AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

the importance of taking into account the rapid spatial decay of production ex-
ternalities when comparing estimates at different levels of spatial aggregation.
We also find residential externalities of a comparable magnitude to production
externalities.
   We show that the special case of the model in which productivity and ameni-
ties are exogenous is unable to account quantitatively for the observed treat-
ment effects of division and reunification. In contrast, for the estimated values
of agglomeration forces, the model is successful in accounting for these ob-
served treatment effects. Although we use the natural experiment of Berlin to
estimate the model’s parameters, our quantitative framework can be used to
undertake counterfactuals for changes in the organization of economic activity
within cities in response to other interventions, such as changes in the transport
network.

                                      REFERENCES
AHLFELDT, G. M., S. J. REDDING, D. M. STURM, AND N. WOLF (2015): “Supplement to ‘The
  Economics of Density: Evidence From the Berlin Wall’,” Econometrica Supplemental Material,
  83, http://dx.doi.org/10.3982/ECTA10876. [2136,2143]
ALBOUY, D. (2008): “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life Across
  Metropolitan Areas,” Working Paper 14472, NBER. [2137]
ALONSO, W. (1964): Location and Land Use. Cambridge, MA: Harvard. [2131,2144]
AMERICAN EMBASSY (1965): Handbook of Economic Statistics: Federal Republic of Germany and
  Western Sectors of Berlin. Bonn: American Embassy. [2140]
ARZAGHI, M., AND J. V. HENDERSON (2008): “Networking Off Madison Avenue,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 75 (4), 1011–1038. [2132,2179]
BAUM-SNOW, N. (2007): “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 122 (2), 775–780. [2132]
BERTRAND, M., E. DUFLO, AND S. MULLAINATHAN (2004): “How Much Should We Trust
  Differences-in-Differences Estimators?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1), 249–275.
  [2155]
BLEAKLEY, H., AND J. LIN (2012): “Portage and Path Dependence,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 127 (2), 587–644. [2132]
BRINKMAN, J. (2013): “Congestion, Agglomeration, and the Structure of Cities,” Working Pa-
  per 13-25, Philadelphia Fed. [2131]
CICCONE, A., AND R. E. HALL (1996): “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,”
  American Economic Review, 86 (1), 54–70. [2132]
COMBES, P.-P., G. DURANTON, L. GOBILLON, AND S. ROUX (2010): “Estimating Agglomeration
  Economies With History, Geology, and Worker Effects,” in Agglomeration Economies, ed. by
  E. L. Glaeser. Chicago: Chicago University Press. [2132]
COMBES, P.-P., G. DURANTON, AND L. GOBILLON (2014): “The Costs of Agglomeration: Land
  Prices in French Cities,” Report, Wharton. [2142,2167]
CONLEY, T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation With Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 92 (1), 1–45. [2153-2156,2158,2159,2169,2173,2177,2183]
DAVIS, D. R., AND D. E. WEINSTEIN (2002): “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geography
  of Economic Activity,” American Economic Review, 92 (5), 1269–1289. [2132]
          (2008): “A Search for Multiple Equilibria in Urban Industrial Structure,” Journal of
  Regional Science, 48 (1), 29–65. [2132]
DAVIS, M. A., AND F. ORTALO-MAGNÉ (2011): “Housing Expenditures, Wages, Rents,” Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 14 (2), 248–261. [2137,2167]
                             THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                    2187

DEKLE, R., AND J. EATON (1999): “Agglomeration and Land Rents: Evidence From the Prefec-
  tures,” Journal of Urban Economics, 46 (2), 200–214. [2132]
DIAMOND, R. (2013): “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverging
  Location Choices by Skill: 1980–2000,” Report, Stanford Graduate School of Business. [2180]
DONALDSON, D. (2015): “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infras-
  tructure,” American Economic Review (forthcoming). [2132]
DURANTON, G., AND D. PUGA (2004): “Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration
  Economies,” in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4, ed. by J. V. Henderson
  and J.-F. Thisse. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2063–2117. [2131,2144]
DURANTON, G., AND M. A. TURNER (2011): “The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion: Evi-
  dence From US Cities,” American Economic Review, 101 (6), 2616–2652. [2166]
           (2012): “Urban Growth and Transportation,” Review of Economic Studies, 79 (4),
  1407–1440. [2132]
EATON, J., AND S. KORTUM (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70 (5),
  1741–1779. [2131,2137,2168]
ELKINS, T. H., AND B. HOFMEISTER (1988): Berlin: Spatial Structure of a Divided City. London–
  New York: Methuen & Co. [2133]
EPPLE, D., B. GORDON, AND H. SIEG (2010): “A New Approach to Estimating the Production
  Function for Housing,” American Economic Review, 100 (3), 905–924. [2142,2167]
FABER, B. (2015): “Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence from China’s
  National Trunk Highway System,” Review of Economic Studies (forthcoming). [2132]
FEDER, G. (1939): Arbeitstätte—Wohnstätte. Schriftenreihe der Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft für
  Raumforschung an der Technischen Hochschule Berlin. Berlin: Julius Springer. [2166]
FORTHERINGHAM, S., AND M. O’KELLY (1989): Spatial Interaction Models: Formulations and Ap-
  plications. Dordrecht: Kluwer. [2164]
FRANKLIN, W. M. (1963): “Zonal Boundaries and Access to Berlin,” World Politics, 16 (1), 1–31.
  [2133]
FUJITA, M., AND P. KRUGMAN (1995): “When Is the Economy Monocentric? Von Thünen and
  Chamberlain Unified,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 25 (4), 505–528. [2131]
FUJITA, M., AND H. OGAWA (1982): “Multiple Equilibria and Structural Transformation of Non-
  Monocentric Urban Configurations,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 12 (2), 161–196.
  [2131,2144]
GLAESER, E. L., AND D. C. MARE (2001): “Cities and Skills,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19 (2),
  316–342. [2132]
GLAESER, E. L., J. KOLKO, AND A. SAIZ (2001): “Consumer City,” Journal of Economic Geogra-
  phy, 1 (1), 27–50. [2180]
GREENSTONE, M., R. HORNBECK, AND E. MORETTI (2010): “Identifying Agglomeration
  Spillovers: Evidence From Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 118 (3), 536–598. [2132,2179]
GROGGER, J., AND G. HANSON (2011): “Income Maximization and the Selection and Sorting of
  International Migrants,” Journal of Development Economics, 95 (1), 42–57. [2131]
HANSON, G. H. (1996): “Localization Economies, Vertical Organization, and Trade,” American
  Economic Review, 86 (5), 1266–1278. [2132]
          (1997): “Increasing Returns, Trade, and the Regional Structure of Wages,” Economic
  Journal, 107 (1), 113–133. [2132]
HEAD, K., AND T. MAYER (2014): “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook,” in
  Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, ed. by E. Helpman, G. Gopinath, and K. Rogoff.
  Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland, 131–196. [2163]
HENDERSON, J. V., A. KUNCORO, AND M. TURNER (1995): “Industrial Development in Cities,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 103 (5), 1067–1085. [2132]
HERDEGEN, G. (1992): “Einstellungen zur Deutschen Einheit,” in Handwörterbuch zur Deutschen
  Einheit, Vol. 4, ed. by W. Weidenfeld and K.-R. Korte. Frankfurt am Main: Campus Verlag.
  [2135]
2188                   AHLFELDT, REDDING, STURM, AND WOLF

KALWEIT, F. (1929): Die Baustellenwerte in Berlin 1928. Berlin: Emro. [2150]
          (1937): Die Baustellenwerte in Berlin: Strassen-Verzeichnis, Neubearbeitung Abgeschlossen
  am 30. Juni 1936. Berlin: Carl Heymanns. [2150]
KENNAN, J., AND J. R. WALKER (2011): “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration
  Decisions,” Econometrica, 79 (1), 211–251. [2131]
KLINE, P., AND E. MORETTI (2014): “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
  and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence From the Tennessee Valley Authority,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129 (1), 275–331. [2132,2179]
LAMBRECHT, H., AND H. TISCHNER (1969): Der Handel West-Berlins mit der DDR und Osteuropa:
  Probleme und Möglichkeiten. Berlin: Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung. [2134]
LEYDEN, F. (1933): Gross-Berlin: Geographie einer Weltstadt. Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag. [2150]
LUCAS, R. E. (2000): “Externalities and Cities,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 4 (2), 245–274.
  [2144]
LUCAS, R. E., AND E. ROSSI-HANSBERG (2002): “On the Internal Structure of Cities,” Econo-
  metrica, 70 (4), 1445–1476. [2131]
MARSHALL, A. (1920): Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan. [2128]
MCARTHUR, D. P., G. KLEPPE, I. THORSEN, AND J. UBOE (2011): “The Spatial Transferability of
  Parameters in a Gravity Model of Commuting Flows,” Journal of Transport Geography, 19 (4),
  596–605. [2164]
MCDONALD, J., AND D. MCMILLEN (2010): Urban Economics and Real Estate: Theory and Policy.
  Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. [2164]
MCFADDEN, D. (1974): “The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand,” Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 3 (4), 303–328. [2131,2137]
MELO, P. C., D. J. GRAHAM, AND R. B. NOLAND (2009): “A Meta-Analysis of Estimates of Urban
  Agglomeration Economies,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39 (3), 332–342. [2179]
MICHAELS, G. (2008): “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence From the Inter-
  state Highway System,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (4), 683–701. [2132]
MILLS, E. S. (1967): “An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Centre,”
  American Economic Review, 57 (2), 197–210. [2131,2144]
MORETTI, E. (2004): “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence From Plant-
  Level Production Functions,” American Economic Review, 94, 656–690. [2132]
           (2011): “Local Labor Markets,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b, ed. by
  D. Card and O. Ashenfelter. Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland, 1238–1303. [2132]
MUTH, R. (1969): Cities and Housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. [2131,2144]
OFFICE FOR STATISTICS BERLIN-BRANDENBURG (2007): Statistical Yearbook of Berlin. Berlin:
  Office for Statistics Berlin-Brandenburg. [2148]
RAUCH, J. E. (1993): “Productivity Gains From Geographic Concentration of Human Capital,”
  Journal of Urban Economics, 34 (3), 380–400. [2132]
REDDING, S. J., AND D. M. STURM (2008): “The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence From German
  Division and Reunification,” American Economic Review, 98 (5), 1766–1797. [2132]
REDDING, S. J., D. M. STURM, AND N. WOLF (2011): “History and Industry Location: Evidence
  From German Airports,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (3), 814–831. [2132]
ROBACK, J. (1982): “Wages, Rents and the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy, 90 (6),
  1257–1278. [2132,2137]
ROGGENBUCH, F. (2008): Das Berliner Grenzgängerproblem. Verflechtung und Systemkonkurrenz
  vor dem Mauerbau. Berlin–New York: Walter de Gruyter. [2134]
ROSENTHAL, S. S., AND W. C. STRANGE (2004): “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Ag-
  glomeration Economics,” in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4, ed. by J. V.
  Henderson and J. F. Thisse. Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland. [2131,2179]
          (2008): “The Attenuation of Human Capital Spillovers,” Journal of Urban Economics,
  64 (2), 373–389. [2132]
ROSSI-HANSBERG, E., P.-D. SARTE, AND R. I. OWENS (2010): “Housing Externalities,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 118 (3), 485–535. [2132,2180]
                              THE ECONOMICS OF DENSITY                                    2189

SHARP, T. (1975): The Wartime Alliance and the Zonal Division of Germany. Oxford: Clarendon
  Press. [2133]
SVEIKAUSKAS, L. A. (1975): “The Productivity of Cities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 89 (3),
  393–413. [2132,2144]
TIMOTHY, D., AND W. C. WHEATON (2001): “Intra-Urban Wage Variation, Employment Loca-
  tion, and Commuting Times,” Journal of Urban Economics, 50 (2), 338–366. [2168]
VALENTINYI, Á., AND B. HERRENDORF (2008): “Measuring Factor Income Shares at the Sectoral
  Level,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11 (4), 820–835. [2167]


  Dept. of Geography and Environment, London School of Economics, Hough-
ton Street, London, WC2A 2AE, U.K. and CEPR; g.ahlfeldt@lse.ac.uk,
  WWS and Dept. of Economics, Princeton University, Fisher Hall, Princeton, NJ
08540, U.S.A., NBER, and CEPR; reddings@princeton.edu,
  Dept. of Economics, London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London,
WC2A 2AE, U.K. and CEPR; d.m.sturm@lse.ac.uk,
                                   and
  Dept. of Economics, Humboldt University, Spandauer Strasse 1, 10178 Berlin,
Germany and CEPR; nikolaus.wolf@wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
              Manuscript received June, 2012; final revision received February, 2015.
